docs/3.x/reporting-api-clients.md, before:

---
category: Integrate
previous: querying-the-reporting-api
---
# Reporting API Clients

## About this guide

**Read this guide if**

* you'd like to know **which client libraries are available to use [Piwik's Reporting HTTP API](https://developer.piwik.org/guides/reporting-introduction) from your application**

## Client libraries

### PHP client

You can use directly Piwik's codebase to call the reporting API. Learn more in [Querying the reporting API](querying-the-reporting-api).

### Ruby client

A Ruby client for the reporting API is available on Github: [github.com/matomo-org/piwik-ruby-api](https://github.com/matomo-org/piwik-ruby-api).

### Python client

A complete Python client implementation of the reporting API is available on Github at [github.com/matomo-org/piwik-python-api](https://github.com/matomo-org/piwik-python-api).

### C# client

A C# client implementation of the reporting API is available on Github at [github.com/matomo-org/piwik-dotnet-api](https://github.com/matomo-org/piwik-dotnet-api).

### NodeJS client

A NodeJS client is available on Github at [github.com/sandfox/nodejs-piwik](https://github.com/sandfox/nodejs-piwik).

### Laravel

A client library for Laravel (a PHP framework) is available at [github.com/RobBrazier/Laravel_Piwik](https://github.com/RobBrazier/Laravel_Piwik).

## Learn more

You can view the complete list of clients and integrations of Piwik at [piwik.org/integrate/](https://piwik.org/integrate/).

Commit message:

link to "Client libraries for Tracking API" from the Reporting API clients

docs/3.x/reporting-api-clients.md, after:

---
category: Integrate
previous: querying-the-reporting-api
---
# Reporting API Clients

## About this guide

**Read this guide if**

* you'd like to know **which client libraries are available to use [Piwik's Reporting HTTP API](https://developer.piwik.org/guides/reporting-introduction) from your application**

## Client libraries for Reporting API

### PHP client

You can use directly Piwik's codebase to call the reporting API. Learn more in [Querying the reporting API](querying-the-reporting-api).

### Ruby client

A Ruby client for the reporting API is available on Github: [github.com/matomo-org/piwik-ruby-api](https://github.com/matomo-org/piwik-ruby-api).

### Python client

A complete Python client implementation of the reporting API is available on Github at [github.com/matomo-org/piwik-python-api](https://github.com/matomo-org/piwik-python-api).

### C# client

A C# client implementation of the reporting API is available on Github at [github.com/matomo-org/piwik-dotnet-api](https://github.com/matomo-org/piwik-dotnet-api).

### NodeJS client

A NodeJS client is available on Github at [github.com/sandfox/nodejs-piwik](https://github.com/sandfox/nodejs-piwik).

### Laravel

A client library for Laravel (a PHP framework) is available at [github.com/RobBrazier/Laravel_Piwik](https://github.com/RobBrazier/Laravel_Piwik).

## Client libraries for Tracking API

If you're looking instead for client libraries to use Matomo Tracking HTTP API and track your application or API usage, please see our [Matomo Tracking API Clients guide.](https://developer.matomo.org/guides/tracking-api-clients)


## Learn more

You can view the complete list of clients and integrations of Piwik at [piwik.org/integrate/](https://piwik.org/integrate/).
