Classes
=======

This is a complete list of available classes:

- [`Piwik\API\Request`](Piwik/API/Request.md) &mdash; Dispatches API requests to the appropriate API method.
- [`Piwik\Archive`](Piwik/Archive.md) &mdash; The **Archive** class is used to query cached analytics statistics (termed &quot;archive data&quot;).
- [`Piwik\ArchiveProcessor`](Piwik/ArchiveProcessor.md) &mdash; Used to insert numeric and blob archive data.
- [`Piwik\ArchiveProcessor\Day`](Piwik/ArchiveProcessor/Day.md) &mdash; Initiates the archiving process for **day** periods via the [ArchiveProcessor.Day.compute](#) event.
- [`Piwik\ArchiveProcessor\Period`](Piwik/ArchiveProcessor/Period.md) &mdash; Initiates the archiving process for all non-day periods via the [ArchiveProcessor.Period.compute](#) event.
- [`Piwik\Common`](Piwik/Common.md) &mdash; Contains helper methods used by both Piwik Core and the Piwik Tracking engine.
- [`Piwik\Config`](Piwik/Config.md) &mdash; Singleton that provides read &amp; write access to Piwik&#039;s INI configuration.
- [`Piwik\DataAccess\LogAggregator`](Piwik/DataAccess/LogAggregator.md) &mdash; Contains methods that aggregates log data (visits, actions, conversions, ecommerce).
- [`Piwik\DataTable`](Piwik/DataTable.md) &mdash; The primary data structure used to store analytics data in Piwik.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter.md) &mdash; A filter is set of logic that manipulates a DataTable.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\AddColumnsProcessedMetrics`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/AddColumnsProcessedMetrics.md) &mdash; Adds the following columns to a DataTable using metrics that already exist:  - **conversion_rate**: percent value of `nb_conversions / nb_visits - **nb_actions_per_visit**: `nb_actions / nb_visits` - **avg_time_on_site**: in number of seconds, `round(visit_length / nb_visits)`.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\AddColumnsProcessedMetricsGoal`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/AddColumnsProcessedMetricsGoal.md) &mdash; Adds the following columns to a DataTable using metrics that already exist:  - **revenue_per_visit**: total goal and ecommerce revenue / nb_visits - **goal_%idGoal%_conversion_rate**: the conversion rate.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\AddSummaryRow`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/AddSummaryRow.md) &mdash; Add a summary row row to the table that is the sum of all other table rows.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\BeautifyRangeLabels`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/BeautifyRangeLabels.md) &mdash; A DataTable filter that replaces range label columns with prettier, human-friendlier versions.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\BeautifyTimeRangeLabels`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/BeautifyTimeRangeLabels.md) &mdash; A DataTable filter that replaces range labels whose values are in seconds with prettier, human-friendlier versions.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\CalculateEvolutionFilter`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/CalculateEvolutionFilter.md) &mdash; A DataTable filter that calculates the evolution of a metric and adds it to each row as a percentage.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\ColumnCallbackAddColumn`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/ColumnCallbackAddColumn.md) &mdash; Adds a new column to every row of a DataTable based on the result of callback.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\ColumnCallbackAddColumnPercentage`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/ColumnCallbackAddColumnPercentage.md) &mdash; Calculates a percentage value for each row of a DataTable and adds the result to each row.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\ColumnCallbackAddColumnQuotient`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/ColumnCallbackAddColumnQuotient.md) &mdash; Calculates the quotient of two columns and adds the result as a new column for each row of a DataTable.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\ColumnCallbackAddMetadata`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/ColumnCallbackAddMetadata.md) &mdash; Executes a callback for each row of a DataTable and adds the result as a new metadata column.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\ColumnCallbackDeleteRow`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/ColumnCallbackDeleteRow.md) &mdash; Delete all rows for which a callback returns true.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\ColumnDelete`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/ColumnDelete.md) &mdash; Filter that will remove columns from a DataTable using either a blacklist, whitelist or both.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\ExcludeLowPopulation`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/ExcludeLowPopulation.md) &mdash; Deletes all rows for which a specific column has a value that is lower than specific minimum threshold value.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\GroupBy`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/GroupBy.md) &mdash; DataTable filter that will group DataTable rows together based on the results of a reduce function.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\Limit`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/Limit.md) &mdash; Delete all rows from the table that are not in the given offset -&gt; offset+limit range.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\MetadataCallbackAddMetadata`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/MetadataCallbackAddMetadata.md) &mdash; Executes a callback for each row of a DataTable and adds the result to the row as a metadata value.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\MetadataCallbackReplace`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/MetadataCallbackReplace.md) &mdash; Execute a callback for each row of a DataTable using certain column values and metadata and replaces row metadata with the result.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\Pattern`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/Pattern.md) &mdash; Deletes every row for which a specific column does not match a supplied regex pattern.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\PatternRecursive`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/PatternRecursive.md) &mdash; Deletes rows for which a specific column in both the row and all subtables that descend from the row do not match a supplied regex pattern.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\ReplaceColumnNames`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/ReplaceColumnNames.md) &mdash; Replaces column names in each row of a table using an array that maps old column names new ones.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\ReplaceSummaryRowLabel`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/ReplaceSummaryRowLabel.md) &mdash; Replaces the label of the summary row with a supplied label.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\Sort`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/Sort.md) &mdash; Sorts a DataTable based on the value of a specific column.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Filter\Truncate`](Piwik/DataTable/Filter/Truncate.md) &mdash; Truncates a DataTable by merging all rows after a certain index into a new summary row, unless the count of rows is less than the index.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Map`](Piwik/DataTable/Map.md) &mdash; Stores an array of DataTables indexed by one type of DataTable metadata (such as site ID or period).
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Row`](Piwik/DataTable/Row.md) &mdash; This is what a [DataTable](#) is composed of.
- [`Piwik\DataTable\Simple`](Piwik/DataTable/Simple.md) &mdash; A [DataTable](#) where every row has two columns: **label** and **value**.
- [`Piwik\Date`](Piwik/Date.md) &mdash; Utility class that wraps date/time related PHP functions.
- [`Piwik\Db`](Piwik/Db.md) &mdash; Helper class that contains SQL related helper functions.
- [`Piwik\Filesystem`](Piwik/Filesystem.md) &mdash; Contains helper functions that involve the filesystem.
- [`Piwik\FrontController`](Piwik/FrontController.md) &mdash; This singleton dispatches requests to the appropriate plugin Controller.
- [`Piwik\Http`](Piwik/Http.md) &mdash; Server-side http client to retrieve content from remote servers, and optionally save to a local file.
- [`Piwik\IP`](Piwik/IP.md) &mdash; Contains IP address helper functions (for both IPv4 and IPv6).
- [`Piwik\Log`](Piwik/Log.md) &mdash; Logging utility class.
- [`Piwik\Mail`](Piwik/Mail.md) &mdash; Class for sending mails, for more information see: [http://framework.zend.com/manual/en/zend.mail.html](#http://framework.zend.com/manual/en/zend.mail.html)
- [`Piwik\Menu\MenuAbstract`](Piwik/Menu/MenuAbstract.md) &mdash; Base class for classes that manage one of Piwik&#039;s menus.
- [`Piwik\Menu\MenuAdmin`](Piwik/Menu/MenuAdmin.md) &mdash; Contains menu entries for the Admin menu.
- [`Piwik\Menu\MenuMain`](Piwik/Menu/MenuMain.md) &mdash; Contains menu entries for the Main menu (the menu displayed under the Piwik logo).
- [`Piwik\Menu\MenuTop`](Piwik/Menu/MenuTop.md) &mdash; Contains menu entries for the Top menu (the menu at the very top of the page).
- [`Piwik\Metrics`](Piwik/Metrics.md) &mdash; This class contains metadata regarding core metrics and contains several related helper functions.
- [`Piwik\MetricsFormatter`](Piwik/MetricsFormatter.md) &mdash; Contains helper function that format numerical values in different ways.
- [`Piwik\Nonce`](Piwik/Nonce.md) &mdash; Nonce class.
- [`Piwik\Notification`](Piwik/Notification.md) &mdash; Notification class.
- [`Piwik\Notification\Manager`](Piwik/Notification/Manager.md)
- [`Piwik\Option`](Piwik/Option.md) &mdash; Convenient key-value storage for user specified options and temporary data that needs to be persisted beyond one request.
- [`Piwik\Period`](Piwik/Period.md) &mdash; Date range representation.
- [`Piwik\Period\Range`](Piwik/Period/Range.md) &mdash; Arbitrary date range representation.
- [`Piwik\Piwik`](Piwik/Piwik.md) &mdash; Main piwik helper class.
- [`Piwik\Plugin`](Piwik/Plugin.md) &mdash; Base class of all Plugin Descriptor classes.
- [`Piwik\Plugin\API`](Piwik/Plugin/API.md) &mdash; The base class of all API singletons.
- [`Piwik\Plugin\Archiver`](Piwik/Plugin/Archiver.md) &mdash; The base class that should be extended by plugins that archive their own metrics.
- [`Piwik\Plugin\Controller`](Piwik/Plugin/Controller.md) &mdash; Base class of all plugin Controllers.
- [`Piwik\Plugin\ControllerAdmin`](Piwik/Plugin/ControllerAdmin.md) &mdash; Base class of plugin controllers that provide administrative functionality.
- [`Piwik\Plugin\Manager`](Piwik/Plugin/Manager.md) &mdash; The singleton that manages plugin loading/unloading and installation/uninstallation.
- [`Piwik\Plugin\Settings`](Piwik/Plugin/Settings.md) &mdash; Settings class that plugins can extend in order to create settings for their plugins.
- [`Piwik\Plugin\ViewDataTable`](Piwik/Plugin/ViewDataTable.md) &mdash; This class is used to load (from the API) and customize the output of a given DataTable.
- [`Piwik\Plugin\Visualization`](Piwik/Plugin/Visualization.md) &mdash; Base class for all DataTable visualizations.
- [`Piwik\Plugins\API\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/API/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\Actions\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/Actions/Controller.md) &mdash; Actions controller
- [`Piwik\Plugins\Annotations\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/Annotations/Controller.md) &mdash; Controller for the Annotations plugin.
- [`Piwik\Plugins\CoreAdminHome\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/CoreAdminHome/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\CoreHome\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/CoreHome/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\CorePluginsAdmin\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/CorePluginsAdmin/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\CoreUpdater\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/CoreUpdater/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\CustomVariables\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/CustomVariables/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\DBStats\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/DBStats/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\Dashboard\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/Dashboard/Controller.md) &mdash; Dashboard Controller
- [`Piwik\Plugins\DevicesDetection\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/DevicesDetection/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\ExamplePlugin\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/ExamplePlugin/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\ExampleRssWidget\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/ExampleRssWidget/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\ExampleUI\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/ExampleUI/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\Feedback\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/Feedback/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\Goals\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/Goals/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\ImageGraph\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/ImageGraph/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\Installation\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/Installation/Controller.md) &mdash; Installation controller
- [`Piwik\Plugins\LanguagesManager\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/LanguagesManager/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\Live\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/Live/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\Login\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/Login/Controller.md) &mdash; Login controller
- [`Piwik\Plugins\MobileMessaging\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/MobileMessaging/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\MultiSites\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/MultiSites/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\Overlay\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/Overlay/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\PrivacyManager\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/PrivacyManager/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\Provider\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/Provider/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\Proxy\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/Proxy/Controller.md) &mdash; Controller for proxy services
- [`Piwik\Plugins\Referrers\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/Referrers/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\SEO\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/SEO/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\ScheduledReports\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/ScheduledReports/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\SegmentEditor\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/SegmentEditor/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\SitesManager\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/SitesManager/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\Transitions\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/Transitions/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\UserCountryMap\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/UserCountryMap/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\UserCountry\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/UserCountry/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\UserSettings\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/UserSettings/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\UsersManager\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/UsersManager/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\VisitFrequency\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/VisitFrequency/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\VisitTime\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/VisitTime/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\VisitorInterest\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/VisitorInterest/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\VisitsSummary\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/VisitsSummary/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\Plugins\Widgetize\Controller`](Piwik/Plugins/Widgetize/Controller.md)
- [`Piwik\RankingQuery`](Piwik/RankingQuery.md) &mdash; The ranking query class wraps an arbitrary SQL query with more SQL that limits the number of results while grouping the rest to &quot;Others&quot; and allows for some more fancy things that can be configured via method calls of this class.
- [`Piwik\ScheduledTask`](Piwik/ScheduledTask.md) &mdash; ScheduledTask is used by the task scheduler and by plugins to configure runnable tasks.
- [`Piwik\ScheduledTime\Daily`](Piwik/ScheduledTime/Daily.md) &mdash; Daily class is used to schedule tasks every day.
- [`Piwik\ScheduledTime\Hourly`](Piwik/ScheduledTime/Hourly.md) &mdash; Hourly class is used to schedule tasks every hour.
- [`Piwik\ScheduledTime\Monthly`](Piwik/ScheduledTime/Monthly.md) &mdash; Monthly class is used to schedule tasks every month.
- [`Piwik\ScheduledTime\Weekly`](Piwik/ScheduledTime/Weekly.md) &mdash; Weekly class is used to schedule tasks every week.
- [`Piwik\Segment`](Piwik/Segment.md) &mdash; Limits the set of visits Piwik uses when aggregating analytics data.
- [`Piwik\SettingsPiwik`](Piwik/SettingsPiwik.md) &mdash; Contains helper methods that can be used to get common Piwik settings.
- [`Piwik\SettingsServer`](Piwik/SettingsServer.md) &mdash; Contains helper methods that can be used to get information regarding the server, its settings and PHP settings.
- [`Piwik\Settings\SystemSetting`](Piwik/Settings/SystemSetting.md) &mdash; System wide setting.
- [`Piwik\Settings\UserSetting`](Piwik/Settings/UserSetting.md) &mdash; Per user setting.
- [`Piwik\Singleton`](Piwik/Singleton.md) &mdash; The singleton class restricts the instantiation of a class to one object only.
- [`Piwik\Site`](Piwik/Site.md) &mdash; Provides access to individual site data (such as name, URL, etc.).
- [`Piwik\TaskScheduler`](Piwik/TaskScheduler.md) &mdash; Manages scheduled task execution.
- [`Piwik\Tracker\Request`](Piwik/Tracker/Request.md) &mdash; Piwik - Open source web analytics
- [`Piwik\Url`](Piwik/Url.md) &mdash; Provides URL related helper methods.
- [`Piwik\UrlHelper`](Piwik/UrlHelper.md) &mdash; Contains less commonly needed URL helper methods.
- [`Piwik\Version`](Piwik/Version.md) &mdash; Piwik version information.
- [`Piwik\View`](Piwik/View.md) &mdash; Encapsulates and manages a [Twig](http://twig.sensiolabs.org/) template.
- [`Piwik\ViewDataTable\Factory`](Piwik/ViewDataTable/Factory.md) &mdash; This class is used to load (from the API) and customize the output of a given DataTable.
- [`Piwik\WidgetsList`](Piwik/WidgetsList.md) &mdash; Manages the global list of reports that can be displayed as dashboard widgets.
