docs/4.x/reporting-api.md, before:

---
category: API Reference 
---
# Reporting API Reference 

This is the Matomo API Reference. It lists all functions that can be called, documents the parameters, and links to examples for every call in the various formats.

The APIs let you programmatically request any analytics reports from Matomo, for one or several websites and for any given date and period and in any format (CSV, JSON, XML, etc.). Matomo also provides Management APIs to create, update and delete websites, users, user privileges, custom dashboards, email reports, goals, funnels, custom dimensions, alerts, videos, heatmaps, session recordings, custom segments, and more. 

## API Request
 
### Standard API parameters

*   **idSite**
 
    *   the integer id of your website, eg. _idSite=1_
    *   you can also specify a list of idSites comma separated, eg. _idSite=1,4,5,6_
    *   if you want to get data for all websites, set _idSite=all_ (this is only supported by some API methods and there might be issues should eg dimensions, goals, or segments only be available for specific sites)


*   **period** &mdash; the period you request the statistics for. Can be any of: _day_, _week_, _month_, _year_ or _range_. All reports are returned for the dates based on the website's time zone.

    *   **day** returns data for a given day.
    *   **week** returns data for the week that contains the specified 'date'
    *   **month** returns data for the month that contains the specified 'date'
    *   **year** returns data for the year that contains the specified 'date'
    *   **range** returns data for the specified 'date' range.

    For example to request a report for the range Jan 1st to Feb 15th you would write _&period=range&date=2011-01-01,2011-02-15_


*   **date**

    *   standard format = _YYYY-MM-DD_
    *   magic keywords = _today_, _yesterday_, _lastWeek_, _lastMonth_ or _lastYear_. These are relative the website timezone. For example, for a website with UTC+12 timezone, "date=today" for an API request at 5PM UTC on 2010-01-01 will return the reports for 2010-01-02. (Note: _lastWeek_, _lastMonth_ and _lastYear_ are only available as of Matomo 4.1)
    *   range of dates

        *   _lastX_ for the last X periods including today (eg &date=last10&period=day would return an entry for each of the last 10 days including today). This is relative to the website timezone.
        *   _previousX_ returns the last X periods before today (eg. &date=previous52&period=week will return an entry for each of the 52 weeks before this week). This is relative to the website timezone.
        *   _YYYY-MM-DD,YYYY-MM-DD_ for every period (day, week, month or year) in the date range

        *   Note: if you set 'period=range' to request data for a custom date range, the API will return the sum of data for the specified date range.
When 'period=range', the following keywords are supported for the parameter 'date':

        *   _lastX_
        *   _previousX_
        *   _YYYY-MM-DD,YYYY-MM-DD_, both dates can be replaced with magic keywords (the first one does not support _today_ and _yesterday_). eg. _YYYY-MM-DD,today_, _lastMonth,YYYY-MM-DD_ or _lastYear,lastWeek_


*   **segment** &mdash; defines the Custom Segment you wish to filter your reports to.

    *   for example, 'referrerName==twitter.com' will return the requested API report, processed for the subset of users coming from twitter.com
    *   segments can be combined in AND and OR operations. For example, to filter for "Visits where (Referrer name is Google OR Referrer name is Bing) AND Country is India", you would write:
_referrerName==Google,referrerName==Bing;country==IN_

        *   see [segmentation documentation](/api-reference/segmentation) for the list of available dimensions & metrics, example values for each, and more information about the custom segment parameter


*   **format**; defines the format of the output

    *   xml
    *   json (if you want to do [cross domain request in ajax](https://bob.pythonmac.org/archives/2005/12/05/remote-json-jsonp/) and get json data, you can wrap the json data around a function call by using the **jsoncallback** parameter)
    *   csv (comma-separated values)
    *   tsv (tab-separated values, similar to CSV but loads properly in Excel)
    *   html
    *   rss (when **date** is a range for example date=last10 or date=previous15)
    *   original; to fetch the original PHP data structure. This is useful when you call the Piwik API [internally using the PHP code](/guides/querying-the-reporting-api)
    
    
*   **filter\_limit**; defines the number of rows to be returned. 
    * By default, only the top **100 rows** are returned.
    * Set to -1 to return all rows. 


### Optional API parameters

Each API call can contain parameters that do not appear in the list of parameters, but act as "filters". Filters can be presentation filters (eg. specify the language for internationalization), or act as data helpers (sort results, search for a dataset subset, fetch children of a given entity).

Here is an overview of the parameters you can add to any API request, where applicable:

*   **language**; if specified, returns data strings that can be internationalized and will be translated. For example, dates and times returned by the Live API can be translated into the specified language. Expected value is the 2 language letters code, eg. en, fr, de, es, etc. You can get the available list of language by calling the LanguagesManager API.

*   **idSubtable** is used to request a subtable of a given row. In Piwik, some rows are linked to a sub-table. For example, each row in the Referrers.getSearchEngines response have an "idsubdatatable" field. This integer idsubdatatable is the idSubtable of the table that contains all keywords for this search engine. You can then request the keywords for this search engine by calling Referrers.getKeywordsFromSearchEngineId with the parameter idSubtable=X (replace X with the idsubdatatable value found in the Referrers.getSearchEngines response, for the search engine you are interested in).

*   **expanded**; some API functions have a parameter 'expanded'. If 'expanded' is set to 1, the returned data will contain the first level results, as well as all sub-tables. See, for example, the [returned dataset for the Actions.getDownloads API function](https://demo.matomo.org/?module=API&method=Actions.getDownloads&idSite=62&period=month&date=today&format=xml&token_auth=anonymous&expanded=1).

*   **flat**; some API functions have a parameter 'expanded', which means that the data is hierarchical. For such API function, if 'flat' is set to 1, the returned data will contain the flattened view of the table data set. The children of all first level rows will be aggregated under one row. This is useful for example to see all Custom Variables names and values at once, for example, [Piwik forum user status](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=CustomVariables.getCustomVariables&idSite=62&period=month&date=yesterday&format=xml&token_auth=anonymous&flat=1), or to see the full URLs not broken down by directory or structure.

*   **label**; this parameter can be used to search only for the row matching a given label. When specified, the report data will be filtered and return only the row where the row label matches the specified parameter. For example, you can set &label=Nice%20Keyword to keep only the row with a label "Nice Keyword".
There are also generic filters you can choose to apply on all APIs that return web analytics reports. For example, there is a filter for sorting by column, define start and number of rows to return, a filter to only return rows matching a given string,

*   **pivotBy**; this parameter can be used to create a pivot table of a report using a specified dimension. Pivoting a report will intersect a report with another report and display a single metric for values along two dimensions. To pivot a report, this query parameter must be set to the ID of the dimension to pivot by. For example, **queryParam=Referrers.Keyword** would pivot against the Keyword dimension.

    Note: If you want to pivot against a dimension that is not the dimension of a report's subtable, you must set the **pivot_by_filter_enable_fetch_by_segment** INI config variable to 1. Using segments will allow you to pivot by any dimension, but currently, it will be slow.
*   **pivotByColumn**; specifies which column should be displayed in a pivoted report. Should be used with **pivotBy** and set to a column name, for example, **nb_visits**.
*   **pivotByColumnLimit**; The maximum number of columns that should be displayed in a pivot table. All other columns are aggregated into an 'Others' column.

*   **filter\_offset**; defines the offset of the starting row being returned
*   **filter\_truncate**; if set, will truncate the table after $filter\_truncate rows. The last row will be named 'Others' (localized in the requested language) and the columns will be an aggregate of statistics of all truncated rows.
*   **filter\_pattern**; defines the text you want to search for in the **filter\_column**. Only the row with the given column matching the pattern will be returned. The pattern will be interpreted as regular expression. Example: `(en|de)\.mydomain`.
*   **filter\_column** ; defines the column that we want to search for a text (see **filter\_pattern**). If not specified, defaults to 'label'
*   **filter\_sort_order**; defines the order of the results, asc or desc
*   **filter\_sort\_column**; defines the column to be sorted by
*   **filter\_excludelowpop**; defines the column to use for the threshold of value **filter\_excludelowpop\_value**; only the columns with a value greater than **filter\_excludelowpop\_value**; will be returned
*   **filter\_excludelowpop\_value**; defines the minimum value for the **filter_excludelowpop** column
*   **hideColumns**; a comma separated list of columns. If set, removes those columns from the result. This can be used to reduce the amount of data transferred.
*   **showColumns**; a comma separated list of columns. If set, removes all columns in the result that are not found in this list. This can be used to reduce the amount of data transferred.
*   **convertToUnicode**; this parameter only applies when the **format** is csv or tsv. By default (when set to 1), the output is sent in UTF-16LE encoding. If set to 0, then the output will be sent encoded in UTF-8.

*   **filter\_column\_recursive**; defines the column to be searched for when recursively searching for a pattern _filter\_pattern\_recursive_
*   **filter\_pattern\_recursive**; defines the text you are searching for. Only the matching rows are returned. This filter is applied to recursive tables (Actions/Downloads/Outlinks tables)

*   **disable\_generic\_filters**; if set to 1, all the generic filters above will not be applied. This can be useful to disable the filters above which are otherwise applied with default values. Mostly used internally or when developing plugins for Piwik.
*   **disable\_queued\_filters**; if set to 1, all the filters that are mostly presentation filters (replace a column name, apply callbacks on the column to add new information such as the browser icon URL, etc.) will not be applied. Mostly used internally or when developing plugins for Piwik.

*   **translateColumnNames**; if set to 1, column names in report output will be translated to the language specified by the `language` parameter described above. Note: this parameter only has an effect for the CSV, RSS and HTML output formats.

### Passing an array of data as a parameter

Some parameters can optionally accept arrays. For example, the urls parameter of SitesManager.addSite, SitesManager.addSiteAliasUrls, and SitesManager.updateSite allows for an array of urls to be passed. To pass an array add the bracket operators and an index to the parameter name in the get request. So, to call SitesManager.addSite with two urls you would use the following array:

[https://demo.matomo.org/?module=API&method=SitesManager.addSite&siteName=new%20example%20website&urls[0]=https://example.org&urls[1]=https://example-alias.org](https://demo.matomo.org/?module=API&method=SitesManager.addSite&siteName=new%20example%20website&urls[0]=https://example.org&urls[1]=https://example-alias.org)

### Advanced Users: Send multiple API Requests at once

Sometimes it is necessary to call the Piwik API a few times to get the data needed for a report or custom application. When you need to call many API functions simultaneously or if you just don't want to issue a lot of HTTP requests, you may want to consider using a **Bulk API Request**. This feature allows you to call several API methods with one HTTP request (either a GET or POST).

To issue a bulk request, call the API.getBulkRequest method and pass the API methods & parameters (each request must be [URL Encoded](https://secure.php.net/manual/en/function.urlencode.php)) you wish to call in the 'urls' query parameter. For example, to call VisitsSummary.get & VisitorInterest.getNumberOfVisitsPerVisitDuration at the same time, you can use:

    https://demo.matomo.org/?module=API&method=API.getBulkRequest&format=json&urls[0]=method%3dVisitsSummary.get%26idSite%3d3%26date%3d2012-03-06%26period%3dday&urls[1]=method%3dVisitorInterest.getNumberOfVisitsPerVisitDuration%26idSite%3d3%26date%3d2012-03-06%26period%3dday

Notice that urls[0] is the url-encoded call to VisitsSummary.get by itself and that urls[1] is what you would use to call VisitorInterest.getNumberOfVisitsPerVisitDuration by itself. The &format is specified only once (format=xml and format=json are supported for bulk requests).

The API Response will be an array containing the formatted result of each individual API method, in this case VisitsSummary.get and VisitorInterest.getNumberOfVisitsPerVisitDuration.

You can also issue the Bulk request as a HTTP POST request to work around any request URI size limitations:

    curl -i -X POST -d 'module=API&method=API.getBulkRequest&format=json&urls[0]=method%3dVisitsSummary.get%26idSite%3d3%26date%3d2012-03-06%26period%3dday&urls[1]=method%3dVisitorInterest.getNumberOfVisitsPerVisitDuration%26idSite%3d3%26date%3d2012-03-06%26period%3dday' https://demo.matomo.org/index.php


## Authenticate to the API via token_auth parameter

In the example above, the request works because the statistics are public (the _anonymous_ user has a _view_ access to the website). By default, in Piwik your statistics are private. In the case that you cannot have your statistics to be public:

*   when you access your Piwik installation you are requested to log in
*   when you call the API over http you need to authenticate yourself
This is done by adding a secret parameter in the URL. This parameter is as secret as your login and password!

You can get this token in the Administration area under _Management_ => _Platform_ => _API_ or under _Personal_ => _Settings_.

Then you simply have to add the parameter **&token\_auth=YOUR\_TOKEN** at the end of your API call URL.

## API Response: Metric Definitions

Here is a list of metrics returned by the API and their definition.

#### General Metrics

*   `nb_uniq_visitors` - Number of unique visitors
*   `nb_visits` - Number of Visits (30 min of inactivity considered a new visit)
*   `nb_users` - Number of unique active users (visitors with a known [User ID](https://matomo.org/docs/user-id/)). If you are not using User ID then this metric will be set to zero.
*   `nb_actions` - Number of actions (page views, outlinks and downloads)
*   `sum_visit_length` - Total time spent, in seconds
*   `bounce_count` - Number of visits that bounced (viewed only one page)
*   `max_actions` - Maximum number of actions in a visit
*   `nb_visits_converted` - Number of visits that converted a goal
*   `nb_conversions` - Number of goal conversions
*   `revenue` - Total revenue of goal conversions

#### Metrics Specific to Page URLs and Page Titles Reports

*   `nb_hits` - Number of views on this page
*   `entry_nb_visits` - Number of visits that started on this page
*   `entry_nb_uniq_visitors` - Number of unique visitors that started their visit on this page
*   `entry_nb_actions` - Number of page views for visits that started on this page
*   `entry_sum_visit_length` - Time spent, in seconds, by visits that started on this page
*   `entry_bounce_count` - Number of visits that started on this page, and bounced (viewed only one page)
*   `exit_nb_visits` - Number of visits that finished on this page
*   `exit_nb_uniq_visitors` - Number of unique visitors that ended their visit on this page
*   `sum_time_spent` - Total time spent on this page, in seconds
*   `sum_daily_nb_uniq_visitors` - Sum of daily unique visitors over days in the period. Piwik doesn't process unique visitors across the full period.
*   `sum_daily_entry_nb_uniq_visitors` - Sum of daily unique visitors that started their visit on this page
*   `sum_daily_exit_nb_uniq_visitors` - (deprecated) Same as `sum_daily_entry_nb_uniq_visitors`
*   `exit_bounce_count` - (deprecated) Same as `entry_bounce_count`

#### Processed metrics, appearing in the Metadata API response

*   `avg_time_on_page` - Average time spent, in seconds, on this page
*   `bounce_rate` - Ratio of visits leaving the website after landing on this page
*   `exit_rate` - Ratio of visits that do not view any other page after this page

#### Ecommerce metrics, appearing in the Ecommerce Goals.getItems* API calls only

*   `revenue` - The total revenue generated by Product sales. Excludes tax, shipping and discount.
*   `quantity` - Quantity is the total number of products sold for each Product SKU/Name/Category.
*   `orders` - It is the total number of Ecommerce orders which contained this Product SKU/Name/Category at least once.
*   `abandoned_carts` - This value is only set if the request contains '&abandonedCarts=1'. In this case, "orders" metrics will not be returned. It is the total number of abandoned carts which contained this Product SKU/Name/Category at least once.
*   `avg_price` - The average revenue for this Product/Category.
*   `avg_quantity` - The average quantity for this Product/Category.
*   `nb_visits` - This value appears only if you have set up ['Ecommerce Product/Category page tracking'](https://matomo.org/docs/ecommerce-analytics/#toc-tracking-product-page-views-category-page-views-optional). The number of visits on the Product/Category page.
*   `conversion_rate` - This value appears only if you have set up ['Ecommerce Product/Category page tracking'](https://matomo.org/docs/ecommerce-analytics/#toc-tracking-product-page-views-category-page-views-optional). The conversion rate is the number of orders (or abandoned_carts if the request contains '&abandonedCarts=1') containing this product/category divided by number of visits on the product/category page.

#### Event tracking metrics, appearing in Events API calls

* `nb_events` - Number of events
* `nb_events_with_value` - Number of events which had a value set
* `sum_event_value` - Sum of Event values
* `min_event_value` - Minimum Event value
* `max_event_value` - Maximum Event value
* `avg_event_value` - Average of Event values

#### Glossary

All the commonly used terms in Piwik Analytics are documented in the [Glossary](https://glossary.matomo.org) including all metrics and reports.

## API Method List

{@include https://demo.matomo.cloud/?module=API&action=listAllMethods&prefixUrl=https://demo.matomo.cloud/&idSite=1&date=yesterday}

Commit message:

Mention some API parameters don't work for entities

docs/4.x/reporting-api.md, after:

---
category: API Reference 
---
# Reporting API Reference 

This is the Matomo API Reference. It lists all functions that can be called, documents the parameters, and links to examples for every call in the various formats.

The APIs let you programmatically request any analytics reports from Matomo, for one or several websites and for any given date and period and in any format (CSV, JSON, XML, etc.). Matomo also provides Management APIs to create, update and delete websites, users, user privileges, custom dashboards, email reports, goals, funnels, custom dimensions, alerts, videos, heatmaps, session recordings, custom segments, and more. 

## API Request
 
### Standard API parameters

*   **idSite**
 
    *   the integer id of your website, eg. _idSite=1_
    *   you can also specify a list of idSites comma separated, eg. _idSite=1,4,5,6_
    *   if you want to get data for all websites, set _idSite=all_ (this is only supported by some API methods and there might be issues should eg dimensions, goals, or segments only be available for specific sites)


*   **period** &mdash; the period you request the statistics for. Can be any of: _day_, _week_, _month_, _year_ or _range_. All reports are returned for the dates based on the website's time zone.

    *   **day** returns data for a given day.
    *   **week** returns data for the week that contains the specified 'date'
    *   **month** returns data for the month that contains the specified 'date'
    *   **year** returns data for the year that contains the specified 'date'
    *   **range** returns data for the specified 'date' range.

    For example to request a report for the range Jan 1st to Feb 15th you would write _&period=range&date=2011-01-01,2011-02-15_


*   **date**

    *   standard format = _YYYY-MM-DD_
    *   magic keywords = _today_, _yesterday_, _lastWeek_, _lastMonth_ or _lastYear_. These are relative the website timezone. For example, for a website with UTC+12 timezone, "date=today" for an API request at 5PM UTC on 2010-01-01 will return the reports for 2010-01-02. (Note: _lastWeek_, _lastMonth_ and _lastYear_ are only available as of Matomo 4.1)
    *   range of dates

        *   _lastX_ for the last X periods including today (eg &date=last10&period=day would return an entry for each of the last 10 days including today). This is relative to the website timezone.
        *   _previousX_ returns the last X periods before today (eg. &date=previous52&period=week will return an entry for each of the 52 weeks before this week). This is relative to the website timezone.
        *   _YYYY-MM-DD,YYYY-MM-DD_ for every period (day, week, month or year) in the date range

        *   Note: if you set 'period=range' to request data for a custom date range, the API will return the sum of data for the specified date range.
When 'period=range', the following keywords are supported for the parameter 'date':

        *   _lastX_
        *   _previousX_
        *   _YYYY-MM-DD,YYYY-MM-DD_, both dates can be replaced with magic keywords (the first one does not support _today_ and _yesterday_). eg. _YYYY-MM-DD,today_, _lastMonth,YYYY-MM-DD_ or _lastYear,lastWeek_


*   **segment** &mdash; defines the Custom Segment you wish to filter your reports to.

    *   for example, 'referrerName==twitter.com' will return the requested API report, processed for the subset of users coming from twitter.com
    *   segments can be combined in AND and OR operations. For example, to filter for "Visits where (Referrer name is Google OR Referrer name is Bing) AND Country is India", you would write:
_referrerName==Google,referrerName==Bing;country==IN_

        *   see [segmentation documentation](/api-reference/segmentation) for the list of available dimensions & metrics, example values for each, and more information about the custom segment parameter


*   **format**; defines the format of the output

    *   xml
    *   json (if you want to do [cross domain request in ajax](https://bob.pythonmac.org/archives/2005/12/05/remote-json-jsonp/) and get json data, you can wrap the json data around a function call by using the **jsoncallback** parameter)
    *   csv (comma-separated values)
    *   tsv (tab-separated values, similar to CSV but loads properly in Excel)
    *   html
    *   rss (when **date** is a range for example date=last10 or date=previous15)
    *   original; to fetch the original PHP data structure. This is useful when you call the Piwik API [internally using the PHP code](/guides/querying-the-reporting-api)
    
    
*   **filter\_limit**; defines the number of rows to be returned. 
    * By default, only the top **100 rows** are returned.
    * Set to -1 to return all rows. 


### Optional API parameters

Each API call can contain parameters that do not appear in the list of parameters, but act as "filters". Filters can be presentation filters (eg. specify the language for internationalization), or act as data helpers (sort results, search for a dataset subset, fetch children of a given entity). Some parameters like `filter_sort_order` and `filter_sort_column` only work on reports but not API methods that return entities (such as sites, users, activities).

Here is an overview of the parameters you can add to any API request, where applicable:

*   **language**; if specified, returns data strings that can be internationalized and will be translated. For example, dates and times returned by the Live API can be translated into the specified language. Expected value is the 2 language letters code, eg. en, fr, de, es, etc. You can get the available list of language by calling the LanguagesManager API.

*   **idSubtable** is used to request a subtable of a given row. In Piwik, some rows are linked to a sub-table. For example, each row in the Referrers.getSearchEngines response have an "idsubdatatable" field. This integer idsubdatatable is the idSubtable of the table that contains all keywords for this search engine. You can then request the keywords for this search engine by calling Referrers.getKeywordsFromSearchEngineId with the parameter idSubtable=X (replace X with the idsubdatatable value found in the Referrers.getSearchEngines response, for the search engine you are interested in).

*   **expanded**; some API functions have a parameter 'expanded'. If 'expanded' is set to 1, the returned data will contain the first level results, as well as all sub-tables. See, for example, the [returned dataset for the Actions.getDownloads API function](https://demo.matomo.org/?module=API&method=Actions.getDownloads&idSite=62&period=month&date=today&format=xml&token_auth=anonymous&expanded=1).

*   **flat**; some API functions have a parameter 'expanded', which means that the data is hierarchical. For such API function, if 'flat' is set to 1, the returned data will contain the flattened view of the table data set. The children of all first level rows will be aggregated under one row. This is useful for example to see all Custom Variables names and values at once, for example, [Piwik forum user status](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=CustomVariables.getCustomVariables&idSite=62&period=month&date=yesterday&format=xml&token_auth=anonymous&flat=1), or to see the full URLs not broken down by directory or structure.

*   **label**; this parameter can be used to search only for the row matching a given label. When specified, the report data will be filtered and return only the row where the row label matches the specified parameter. For example, you can set &label=Nice%20Keyword to keep only the row with a label "Nice Keyword".
There are also generic filters you can choose to apply on all APIs that return web analytics reports. For example, there is a filter for sorting by column, define start and number of rows to return, a filter to only return rows matching a given string,

*   **pivotBy**; this parameter can be used to create a pivot table of a report using a specified dimension. Pivoting a report will intersect a report with another report and display a single metric for values along two dimensions. To pivot a report, this query parameter must be set to the ID of the dimension to pivot by. For example, **queryParam=Referrers.Keyword** would pivot against the Keyword dimension.

    Note: If you want to pivot against a dimension that is not the dimension of a report's subtable, you must set the **pivot_by_filter_enable_fetch_by_segment** INI config variable to 1. Using segments will allow you to pivot by any dimension, but currently, it will be slow.
*   **pivotByColumn**; specifies which column should be displayed in a pivoted report. Should be used with **pivotBy** and set to a column name, for example, **nb_visits**.
*   **pivotByColumnLimit**; The maximum number of columns that should be displayed in a pivot table. All other columns are aggregated into an 'Others' column.

*   **filter\_offset**; defines the offset of the starting row being returned
*   **filter\_truncate**; if set, will truncate the table after $filter\_truncate rows. The last row will be named 'Others' (localized in the requested language) and the columns will be an aggregate of statistics of all truncated rows.
*   **filter\_pattern**; defines the text you want to search for in the **filter\_column**. Only the row with the given column matching the pattern will be returned. The pattern will be interpreted as regular expression. Example: `(en|de)\.mydomain`.
*   **filter\_column** ; defines the column that we want to search for a text (see **filter\_pattern**). If not specified, defaults to 'label'
*   **filter\_sort_order**; defines the order of the results, asc or desc
*   **filter\_sort\_column**; defines the column to be sorted by
*   **filter\_excludelowpop**; defines the column to use for the threshold of value **filter\_excludelowpop\_value**; only the columns with a value greater than **filter\_excludelowpop\_value**; will be returned
*   **filter\_excludelowpop\_value**; defines the minimum value for the **filter_excludelowpop** column
*   **hideColumns**; a comma separated list of columns. If set, removes those columns from the result. This can be used to reduce the amount of data transferred.
*   **showColumns**; a comma separated list of columns. If set, removes all columns in the result that are not found in this list. This can be used to reduce the amount of data transferred.
*   **convertToUnicode**; this parameter only applies when the **format** is csv or tsv. By default (when set to 1), the output is sent in UTF-16LE encoding. If set to 0, then the output will be sent encoded in UTF-8.

*   **filter\_column\_recursive**; defines the column to be searched for when recursively searching for a pattern _filter\_pattern\_recursive_
*   **filter\_pattern\_recursive**; defines the text you are searching for. Only the matching rows are returned. This filter is applied to recursive tables (Actions/Downloads/Outlinks tables)

*   **disable\_generic\_filters**; if set to 1, all the generic filters above will not be applied. This can be useful to disable the filters above which are otherwise applied with default values. Mostly used internally or when developing plugins for Piwik.
*   **disable\_queued\_filters**; if set to 1, all the filters that are mostly presentation filters (replace a column name, apply callbacks on the column to add new information such as the browser icon URL, etc.) will not be applied. Mostly used internally or when developing plugins for Piwik.

*   **translateColumnNames**; if set to 1, column names in report output will be translated to the language specified by the `language` parameter described above. Note: this parameter only has an effect for the CSV, RSS and HTML output formats.

### Passing an array of data as a parameter

Some parameters can optionally accept arrays. For example, the urls parameter of SitesManager.addSite, SitesManager.addSiteAliasUrls, and SitesManager.updateSite allows for an array of urls to be passed. To pass an array add the bracket operators and an index to the parameter name in the get request. So, to call SitesManager.addSite with two urls you would use the following array:

[https://demo.matomo.org/?module=API&method=SitesManager.addSite&siteName=new%20example%20website&urls[0]=https://example.org&urls[1]=https://example-alias.org](https://demo.matomo.org/?module=API&method=SitesManager.addSite&siteName=new%20example%20website&urls[0]=https://example.org&urls[1]=https://example-alias.org)

### Advanced Users: Send multiple API Requests at once

Sometimes it is necessary to call the Piwik API a few times to get the data needed for a report or custom application. When you need to call many API functions simultaneously or if you just don't want to issue a lot of HTTP requests, you may want to consider using a **Bulk API Request**. This feature allows you to call several API methods with one HTTP request (either a GET or POST).

To issue a bulk request, call the API.getBulkRequest method and pass the API methods & parameters (each request must be [URL Encoded](https://secure.php.net/manual/en/function.urlencode.php)) you wish to call in the 'urls' query parameter. For example, to call VisitsSummary.get & VisitorInterest.getNumberOfVisitsPerVisitDuration at the same time, you can use:

    https://demo.matomo.org/?module=API&method=API.getBulkRequest&format=json&urls[0]=method%3dVisitsSummary.get%26idSite%3d3%26date%3d2012-03-06%26period%3dday&urls[1]=method%3dVisitorInterest.getNumberOfVisitsPerVisitDuration%26idSite%3d3%26date%3d2012-03-06%26period%3dday

Notice that urls[0] is the url-encoded call to VisitsSummary.get by itself and that urls[1] is what you would use to call VisitorInterest.getNumberOfVisitsPerVisitDuration by itself. The &format is specified only once (format=xml and format=json are supported for bulk requests).

The API Response will be an array containing the formatted result of each individual API method, in this case VisitsSummary.get and VisitorInterest.getNumberOfVisitsPerVisitDuration.

You can also issue the Bulk request as a HTTP POST request to work around any request URI size limitations:

    curl -i -X POST -d 'module=API&method=API.getBulkRequest&format=json&urls[0]=method%3dVisitsSummary.get%26idSite%3d3%26date%3d2012-03-06%26period%3dday&urls[1]=method%3dVisitorInterest.getNumberOfVisitsPerVisitDuration%26idSite%3d3%26date%3d2012-03-06%26period%3dday' https://demo.matomo.org/index.php


## Authenticate to the API via token_auth parameter

In the example above, the request works because the statistics are public (the _anonymous_ user has a _view_ access to the website). By default, in Piwik your statistics are private. In the case that you cannot have your statistics to be public:

*   when you access your Piwik installation you are requested to log in
*   when you call the API over http you need to authenticate yourself
This is done by adding a secret parameter in the URL. This parameter is as secret as your login and password!

You can get this token in the Administration area under _Management_ => _Platform_ => _API_ or under _Personal_ => _Settings_.

Then you simply have to add the parameter **&token\_auth=YOUR\_TOKEN** at the end of your API call URL.

## API Response: Metric Definitions

Here is a list of metrics returned by the API and their definition.

#### General Metrics

*   `nb_uniq_visitors` - Number of unique visitors
*   `nb_visits` - Number of Visits (30 min of inactivity considered a new visit)
*   `nb_users` - Number of unique active users (visitors with a known [User ID](https://matomo.org/docs/user-id/)). If you are not using User ID then this metric will be set to zero.
*   `nb_actions` - Number of actions (page views, outlinks and downloads)
*   `sum_visit_length` - Total time spent, in seconds
*   `bounce_count` - Number of visits that bounced (viewed only one page)
*   `max_actions` - Maximum number of actions in a visit
*   `nb_visits_converted` - Number of visits that converted a goal
*   `nb_conversions` - Number of goal conversions
*   `revenue` - Total revenue of goal conversions

#### Metrics Specific to Page URLs and Page Titles Reports

*   `nb_hits` - Number of views on this page
*   `entry_nb_visits` - Number of visits that started on this page
*   `entry_nb_uniq_visitors` - Number of unique visitors that started their visit on this page
*   `entry_nb_actions` - Number of page views for visits that started on this page
*   `entry_sum_visit_length` - Time spent, in seconds, by visits that started on this page
*   `entry_bounce_count` - Number of visits that started on this page, and bounced (viewed only one page)
*   `exit_nb_visits` - Number of visits that finished on this page
*   `exit_nb_uniq_visitors` - Number of unique visitors that ended their visit on this page
*   `sum_time_spent` - Total time spent on this page, in seconds
*   `sum_daily_nb_uniq_visitors` - Sum of daily unique visitors over days in the period. Piwik doesn't process unique visitors across the full period.
*   `sum_daily_entry_nb_uniq_visitors` - Sum of daily unique visitors that started their visit on this page
*   `sum_daily_exit_nb_uniq_visitors` - (deprecated) Same as `sum_daily_entry_nb_uniq_visitors`
*   `exit_bounce_count` - (deprecated) Same as `entry_bounce_count`

#### Processed metrics, appearing in the Metadata API response

*   `avg_time_on_page` - Average time spent, in seconds, on this page
*   `bounce_rate` - Ratio of visits leaving the website after landing on this page
*   `exit_rate` - Ratio of visits that do not view any other page after this page

#### Ecommerce metrics, appearing in the Ecommerce Goals.getItems* API calls only

*   `revenue` - The total revenue generated by Product sales. Excludes tax, shipping and discount.
*   `quantity` - Quantity is the total number of products sold for each Product SKU/Name/Category.
*   `orders` - It is the total number of Ecommerce orders which contained this Product SKU/Name/Category at least once.
*   `abandoned_carts` - This value is only set if the request contains '&abandonedCarts=1'. In this case, "orders" metrics will not be returned. It is the total number of abandoned carts which contained this Product SKU/Name/Category at least once.
*   `avg_price` - The average revenue for this Product/Category.
*   `avg_quantity` - The average quantity for this Product/Category.
*   `nb_visits` - This value appears only if you have set up ['Ecommerce Product/Category page tracking'](https://matomo.org/docs/ecommerce-analytics/#toc-tracking-product-page-views-category-page-views-optional). The number of visits on the Product/Category page.
*   `conversion_rate` - This value appears only if you have set up ['Ecommerce Product/Category page tracking'](https://matomo.org/docs/ecommerce-analytics/#toc-tracking-product-page-views-category-page-views-optional). The conversion rate is the number of orders (or abandoned_carts if the request contains '&abandonedCarts=1') containing this product/category divided by number of visits on the product/category page.

#### Event tracking metrics, appearing in Events API calls

* `nb_events` - Number of events
* `nb_events_with_value` - Number of events which had a value set
* `sum_event_value` - Sum of Event values
* `min_event_value` - Minimum Event value
* `max_event_value` - Maximum Event value
* `avg_event_value` - Average of Event values

#### Glossary

All the commonly used terms in Piwik Analytics are documented in the [Glossary](https://glossary.matomo.org) including all metrics and reports.

## API Method List

{@include https://demo.matomo.cloud/?module=API&action=listAllMethods&prefixUrl=https://demo.matomo.cloud/&idSite=1&date=yesterday}
