docs/4.x/tests-github.md, before:

---
category: Develop
previous: tests-js-tracker
next: tests-troubleshooting
---
# Running tests/builds on GitHub Action

[Github Action](https://github.com/features/actions) makes it easy to automate all your software workflows, now with world-class CI/CD. Build, test, and deploy your code right from GitHub. Make code reviews, branch management, and issue triaging work the way you want.

## Matomo on GitHub Action

Matomo uses GitHub Action to automatically run its build by various triggers.
- [Build Tracker JS] Trigger by the comment `build js` into the pull request. That will compress js/piwik.js into matomo.js and piwik.js
- [Build VUE] Auto trigger, it will build VUE file and commit back to the PR
- [Composer Update] Auto trigger by cron，it will run `composer update` and commit back to the repo
- [PHPCS check] Auto trigger, checking PHPCS code quality if not valid will return error details.
- [Inactive PR] after 14 days, inactive PR will mark as state


Each developer is responsible to keep the commits/pull requests build green.

## GitHub Action Scripts

All the GitHub Action build file are locate in `.github/workflows/*.yml`

Each script is triggered by its own conditions, for more details see [Github Action Docs](https://docs.github.com/en/actions)

## Create a new CI script

To create a new CI script please read [Quickstart for GitHub Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/quickstart)

We recommend forking the Matomo project and running actions on your own pipeline first. Also, please check the following list before getting started:

### Using other action
If you need to use an action from the marketplace, please ensure that it is either an official action provided by GitHub, or you did a review of the actions code. In latter case, please ensure to use a version fixed by a full length commit SHA.

### Security
There is a chance the action scripts getting hacked, there are two common attack [script injection attacks](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/security-hardening-for-github-actions#example-of-a-script-injection-attack) and [Security hardening](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/security-hardening-for-github-actions).

For more details, refer [this article](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/security-hardening-for-github-actions#overview)

#### Environment Variables
Please make the environment variables used in the action are not customizable by the PR title etc.

#### Sensitive Information
Do not save the secrets value like token, password or any sensitive information in plain text, JSON, XML, YAML (or similar).


### Permission
We recommend using read permissions for the CI unless you want to update the code after CI runs, for more details [Assigning permissions to jobs](https://docs.github.com/en/enterprise-cloud@latest/actions/using-jobs/assigning-permissions-to-jobs)

Commit message:

update menu and some wording

docs/4.x/tests-github.md, after:

---
category: Develop
previous: tests-js-tracker
next: tests-travis
---
# Using GitHub Actions

[Github Action](https://github.com/features/actions) makes it easy to automate all your software workflows, now with world-class CI/CD. Build, test, and deploy your code right from GitHub. Make code reviews, branch management, and issue triaging work the way you want.

## GitHub Actions we use

Matomo uses GitHub Action to automatically run its build by various triggers.
- [Build Tracker JS] Trigger by the comment `build js` into the pull request. That will compress js/piwik.js into matomo.js and piwik.js
- [Build VUE] Auto trigger, it will build VUE file and commit back to the PR
- [Composer Update] Auto trigger by cron，it will run `composer update` and commit back to the repo
- [PHPCS check] Auto trigger, checking PHPCS code quality if not valid will return error details.
- [Inactive PR] after 14 days, inactive PR will mark as state

(New scripts should be documented in the list above.)


## GitHub Action Scripts

All the GitHub Action build file are locate in `.github/workflows/*.yml`

Each script is triggered by its own conditions, for more details see [Github Action Docs](https://docs.github.com/en/actions)

## Create a new GitHub Action script

To create a new GitHub Action script please read [Quickstart for GitHub Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/quickstart)

We recommend forking the Matomo project and running actions on your own pipeline first. Also, please check the following list before getting started:

### Using other action
If you need to use an action from the marketplace, please ensure that it is either an official action provided by GitHub, or you did a review of the actions code. In latter case, please ensure to use a version fixed by a full length commit SHA.

### Security
There is a chance the action scripts getting hacked, paying attention to security is of the upmost importance when you create a new GitHub Action script. 

It could lead a GitHub token lost and write access to our code. 

There are two common attack [script injection attacks](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/security-hardening-for-github-actions#example-of-a-script-injection-attack) and [Security hardening](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/security-hardening-for-github-actions).

For more details, refer [this article](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/security-hardening-for-github-actions#overview)

#### Environment Variables
Please make the environment variables used in the action are not customizable by the PR title etc.

#### Sensitive Information
Do not save the secrets value like token, password or any sensitive information in plain text, JSON, XML, YAML (or similar).


### Permission
We recommend using `none` permissions where every possible, `read` permissions if needed to read the value, `write` only if needed, for more details [Permission syntax](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#permissions) and [Assigning permissions to jobs](https://docs.github.com/en/enterprise-cloud@latest/actions/using-jobs/assigning-permissions-to-jobs)
