docs/4.x/vue-getting-started.md, before:

---
category: DevelopInDepth
---
# Getting started with Vue

Upfront: This document is working draft and far from being complete. We will improve this over time as we do more work with Vue.

## Development Workflow

To learn how to structure and build a Vue module in your Matomo plugin, see the
[relevant part of the Working with Matomo's UI guide](/guides/working-with-piwiks-ui#typescript-and-vue-workflow).

## Developer Concepts

### Component State vs. Application State

Vue allows us to create state driven UI components. Components are defined based on the data they display and manipulate.
This state is said to be "owned" by the component, in that only the component can modify it. Other components, even
child components that are given that state as properties, should not be allowed or capable of changing it. This
allows us to enforce a certain level of predictability in our UI.

Some state, however, is not owned by a single component. It might be state that needs to kept synchronized among
multiple components (for example, the number of notifications in an app that provides multiple places to view them)
or something that is derived from inherently global state (such as the value of a URL query parameter). Global
state like this has to be defined outside of a component and used by whoever needs it.

In Matomo, we accomplish this via the store pattern (see https://v3.vuejs.org/guide/state-management.html#simple-state-management-from-scratch).
Global state is encapsulated in classes, as are the operations that manipulate them. All the data in these stores
are stored as `reactive()` properties or `ref()` values, and the store exposes `computed()` properties for
Vue components to use. Vue components that use them automatically register with the property so when the data changes
in the store, the component will automatically update itself.

Example:

```typescript
import { reactive, computed } from 'vue';

class MyStore {
  private myState = reactive({
    counter: 0,
  });

  readonly counter = computed(() => this.myState.counter);
  readonly isZero = computed(() => this.myState.counter === 0);

  increment() {
    this.myState.counter += 1;
  }
  
  decrement() {
    this.myState.counter -= 1;
  }
}

export default new MyStore();
```

```vue
<template>
  <div>
    <h2>Counter value is: {{ counter }}</h2>
    <div v-if="isZero">The counter is at zero! Press increment or decrement to change the value.</div>
    <div>
      <button @click="increment()">Increment</button>
      <button @click="decrement()">Decrement</button>
    </div>
  </div>
</template>
<script>
import { defineComponent } from 'vue';
import MyStore from './MyStore';

export default defineComponent({
  setup() {
    return {
      // NOTE: we're not using the `.value` property here because we want Vue to bind the computed
      // property in order to be notified of changes.
      counter: MyStore.counter,
      isZero: MyStore.isZero,
      increment: MyStore.increment.bind(MyStore),
      decrement: MyStore.decrement.bind(MyStore),
    };
  },
});
</script>
```

Classes implementing the store pattern should:

* define private reactive state
* only provide public readonly access to that state. This readonly access should be deep, no part of the private
  state should be modifiable by other classes.
* use computed properties, not methods, to return derived data
* provide public methods for logic that mutates the state

### Accessing and changing the URL

URLs in Matomo are mainly based on query parameters, the path and host are not normally used. The base URL's
search has a query string, and the URL hash has another query string. Both are used to determine what the
query parameter values are, with the hash query parameters overriding the search ones.

In new Vue code, the URL query parameters can be accessed and changed via the MatomoUrl store. This store
provides a computed property, named `parsed`, for easily accessing query parameter values. It also provides a method,
`updateHash()` that allows developers to change the URL, and thus potentially load a new page.

An example of accessing query parameter values and modifying the hash when needed:

```typescript
import { computed, readonly } from 'vue';
import { MatomoUrl } from 'CoreHome';

class GoalsStore
{
  private readonly state = reactive({
    goals: {}, // maps idGoal => goal. filled out via an ajax request not shown in this example
  });

  readonly allGoals = computed(() => readonly(this.state).goals);
  
  readonly currentGoal = computed(() => {
    const idGoal = MatomoUrl.parsed.value.idGoal;
    if (idGoal && this.state.goals[idGoal]) {
      return readonly(this.state.goals[idGoal]);
    }
    return undefined;
  });
  
  changeGoal(idGoal: number): void {
    MatomoUrl.updateHash({
      // NOTE: updateHash will rewrite the entire hash, so it is important to include existing query parameters,
      // if you only want to overwrite one or a few parameters.
      ...MatomoUrl.parsed.value,
      idGoal,
    });
  }
}
```

**Watching for changes in the URL**

In general, it is preferred to depend on creating computed properties that are bound to Vue components when accessing
URL values, but sometimes it is necessary to execute some logic every time the URL changes directly. To do this,
you can use Vue's `watch()` function:

```typescript
import { watch } from 'vue';

watch(() => MatomoUrl.parsed.value, (newValue, oldValue) => {
    // do something that creates a side effect
});
```

### Making AJAX Requests

AJAX requests in TypeScript and Vue code should use the `AjaxHelper` class exported by the CoreHome plugin.
This class has two static methods that you can use to make requests: `fetch` and `post`. The only difference
is `post` has a second parameter for POST parameters, but you can also specify those params in the options
argument to `fetch`.

All AJAX requests sent by Matomo are POST requests to avoid caching token_auth values in the browser.

Example:

```typescript
import { AjaxHelper } from 'CoreHome';

interface ResponseType {
  id: number;
  name: string;
  value: string;
}

let isLoading = true;
AjaxHelper.fetch<ResponseType>(
  {
    param: 'value',
    arrayParam: [1, 2, 3],
  },
  {
    // ... other AjaxHelper options ...
    postParams: {
      postValue: 'value 2',
    },
  },
).then((response) => {
  console.log(`Fetched ${response.name} with id = ${response.id}.`);
}).finally(() => {
  isLoading = false;
});
```

#### Bulk Requests

You can make bulk requests by simply passing an array of query objects to `fetch()`. All parameters will be
sent as POST parameters.

Example:

```typescript
import { AjaxHelper } from 'CoreHome';

AjaxHelper.fetch<[ResponseType1, ResponseType2]>([
  {
    method: 'MyPlugin.firstApiRequest',
    // ... 
  },
  {
    method: 'MyPlugin.secondApiRequest',
    // ... 
  },
]).then(([r1, r2]) => {
  // use r1, r2
});
```

### Using Vue components outside of Vue 

Sometimes it's necessary to initiate and use a Vue component from a different context, such as in
a twig template or in raw HTML. This can be accomplished through the use of the `vue-entry` attribute
and the `piwikHelper.compileVueEntryComponents()` method (`Matomo.helper.compileVueEntryComponents()` in Vue code).

**Note: this attribute has to be handled manually by Matomo. Matomo's frontend does not automatically scan
for and notice when a vue-entry element is added to the DOM (except once on page load and when displaying widgets/reporting pages).**
If you are writing code that manually inserts HTML obtained from AJAX that can have a vue-entry element, you will
need to run `compileVueEntryComponents()` yourself on the element containing the new HTML.

**Also note that if you are writing Vue code you should generally not need to use this feature, and instead
just directly use other Vue components.**

Add this attribute to your HTML like so:

```html
<div
  vue-entry="MyPlugin.MyComponent"
  prop-value="&quot;value for propValue property&quot;"
  my-other-property="{&quot;name&quot;: &quot;the name&quot;}"
/>
```

This would mount the `MyComponent` component exported by `MyPlugin` in the div. It would pass the attribute values
as the component's initial prop values. All attribute values should be JSON encoded.

If your component uses slots, you can add a list of components for your slot content to use via a vue-components
attribute:

```html
<div
  vue-entry="MyPlugin.MyComponent"
  vue-components="CoreHome.ProgressBar MyOtherPlugin.MyOtherComponent"
>
  <template v-slot:content>
    <div id="my-content">
      <my-other-component>
        ...
      </my-other-component>

      <progress-bar
        ...
      />
    </div>
  </template>
</div>
```

Commit message:

add quick section on the concept of unidirectional data flow

docs/4.x/vue-getting-started.md, after:

---
category: DevelopInDepth
---
# Getting started with Vue

Upfront: This document is working draft and far from being complete. We will improve this over time as we do more work with Vue.

## Development Workflow

To learn how to structure and build a Vue module in your Matomo plugin, see the
[relevant part of the Working with Matomo's UI guide](/guides/working-with-piwiks-ui#typescript-and-vue-workflow).

## Developer Concepts

### Unidirectional Data Flow

Vue, like most other modern frontend frameworks, is enforces an important concept called "Unidirectional Data Flow",
which basically means changes to data flow in one direction through an app; a change in one part of the app
does not implicitly affect other parts of the app.

In practice this is seen in how components pass data to other components. Parent components pass data as properties
to child components, and child components are disallowed from making changes to that data, so child components
cannot implicitly affect the parent component.

When a child component needs to pass data back up to the parent, it emits an event with the new data. The parent
component receives the event and does something with the data, which could include modifying the data it passes
to the child component.

This loop or cycle is the core mechanism of frontend frameworks like Vue.

### Component State vs. Application State

Vue allows us to create state driven UI components. Components are defined based on the data they display and manipulate.
This state is said to be "owned" by the component, in that only the component can modify it. Other components, even
child components that are given that state as properties, should not be allowed or capable of changing it. This
allows us to enforce a certain level of predictability in our UI.

Some state, however, is not owned by a single component. It might be state that needs to kept synchronized among
multiple components (for example, the number of notifications in an app that provides multiple places to view them)
or something that is derived from inherently global state (such as the value of a URL query parameter). Global
state like this has to be defined outside of a component and used by whoever needs it.

In Matomo, we accomplish this via the store pattern (see https://v3.vuejs.org/guide/state-management.html#simple-state-management-from-scratch).
Global state is encapsulated in classes, as are the operations that manipulate them. All the data in these stores
are stored as `reactive()` properties or `ref()` values, and the store exposes `computed()` properties for
Vue components to use. Vue components that use them automatically register with the property so when the data changes
in the store, the component will automatically update itself.

Example:

```typescript
import { reactive, computed } from 'vue';

class MyStore {
  private myState = reactive({
    counter: 0,
  });

  readonly counter = computed(() => this.myState.counter);
  readonly isZero = computed(() => this.myState.counter === 0);

  increment() {
    this.myState.counter += 1;
  }
  
  decrement() {
    this.myState.counter -= 1;
  }
}

export default new MyStore();
```

```vue
<template>
  <div>
    <h2>Counter value is: {{ counter }}</h2>
    <div v-if="isZero">The counter is at zero! Press increment or decrement to change the value.</div>
    <div>
      <button @click="increment()">Increment</button>
      <button @click="decrement()">Decrement</button>
    </div>
  </div>
</template>
<script>
import { defineComponent } from 'vue';
import MyStore from './MyStore';

export default defineComponent({
  setup() {
    return {
      // NOTE: we're not using the `.value` property here because we want Vue to bind the computed
      // property in order to be notified of changes.
      counter: MyStore.counter,
      isZero: MyStore.isZero,
      increment: MyStore.increment.bind(MyStore),
      decrement: MyStore.decrement.bind(MyStore),
    };
  },
});
</script>
```

Classes implementing the store pattern should:

* define private reactive state
* only provide public readonly access to that state. This readonly access should be deep, no part of the private
  state should be modifiable by other classes.
* use computed properties, not methods, to return derived data
* provide public methods for logic that mutates the state

### Accessing and changing the URL

URLs in Matomo are mainly based on query parameters, the path and host are not normally used. The base URL's
search has a query string, and the URL hash has another query string. Both are used to determine what the
query parameter values are, with the hash query parameters overriding the search ones.

In new Vue code, the URL query parameters can be accessed and changed via the MatomoUrl store. This store
provides a computed property, named `parsed`, for easily accessing query parameter values. It also provides a method,
`updateHash()` that allows developers to change the URL, and thus potentially load a new page.

An example of accessing query parameter values and modifying the hash when needed:

```typescript
import { computed, readonly } from 'vue';
import { MatomoUrl } from 'CoreHome';

class GoalsStore
{
  private readonly state = reactive({
    goals: {}, // maps idGoal => goal. filled out via an ajax request not shown in this example
  });

  readonly allGoals = computed(() => readonly(this.state).goals);
  
  readonly currentGoal = computed(() => {
    const idGoal = MatomoUrl.parsed.value.idGoal;
    if (idGoal && this.state.goals[idGoal]) {
      return readonly(this.state.goals[idGoal]);
    }
    return undefined;
  });
  
  changeGoal(idGoal: number): void {
    MatomoUrl.updateHash({
      // NOTE: updateHash will rewrite the entire hash, so it is important to include existing query parameters,
      // if you only want to overwrite one or a few parameters.
      ...MatomoUrl.parsed.value,
      idGoal,
    });
  }
}
```

**Watching for changes in the URL**

In general, it is preferred to depend on creating computed properties that are bound to Vue components when accessing
URL values, but sometimes it is necessary to execute some logic every time the URL changes directly. To do this,
you can use Vue's `watch()` function:

```typescript
import { watch } from 'vue';

watch(() => MatomoUrl.parsed.value, (newValue, oldValue) => {
    // do something that creates a side effect
});
```

### Making AJAX Requests

AJAX requests in TypeScript and Vue code should use the `AjaxHelper` class exported by the CoreHome plugin.
This class has two static methods that you can use to make requests: `fetch` and `post`. The only difference
is `post` has a second parameter for POST parameters, but you can also specify those params in the options
argument to `fetch`.

All AJAX requests sent by Matomo are POST requests to avoid caching token_auth values in the browser.

Example:

```typescript
import { AjaxHelper } from 'CoreHome';

interface ResponseType {
  id: number;
  name: string;
  value: string;
}

let isLoading = true;
AjaxHelper.fetch<ResponseType>(
  {
    param: 'value',
    arrayParam: [1, 2, 3],
  },
  {
    // ... other AjaxHelper options ...
    postParams: {
      postValue: 'value 2',
    },
  },
).then((response) => {
  console.log(`Fetched ${response.name} with id = ${response.id}.`);
}).finally(() => {
  isLoading = false;
});
```

#### Bulk Requests

You can make bulk requests by simply passing an array of query objects to `fetch()`. All parameters will be
sent as POST parameters.

Example:

```typescript
import { AjaxHelper } from 'CoreHome';

AjaxHelper.fetch<[ResponseType1, ResponseType2]>([
  {
    method: 'MyPlugin.firstApiRequest',
    // ... 
  },
  {
    method: 'MyPlugin.secondApiRequest',
    // ... 
  },
]).then(([r1, r2]) => {
  // use r1, r2
});
```

### Using Vue components outside of Vue 

Sometimes it's necessary to initiate and use a Vue component from a different context, such as in
a twig template or in raw HTML. This can be accomplished through the use of the `vue-entry` attribute
and the `piwikHelper.compileVueEntryComponents()` method (`Matomo.helper.compileVueEntryComponents()` in Vue code).

**Note: this attribute has to be handled manually by Matomo. Matomo's frontend does not automatically scan
for and notice when a vue-entry element is added to the DOM (except once on page load and when displaying widgets/reporting pages).**
If you are writing code that manually inserts HTML obtained from AJAX that can have a vue-entry element, you will
need to run `compileVueEntryComponents()` yourself on the element containing the new HTML.

**Also note that if you are writing Vue code you should generally not need to use this feature, and instead
just directly use other Vue components.**

Add this attribute to your HTML like so:

```html
<div
  vue-entry="MyPlugin.MyComponent"
  prop-value="&quot;value for propValue property&quot;"
  my-other-property="{&quot;name&quot;: &quot;the name&quot;}"
/>
```

This would mount the `MyComponent` component exported by `MyPlugin` in the div. It would pass the attribute values
as the component's initial prop values. All attribute values should be JSON encoded.

If your component uses slots, you can add a list of components for your slot content to use via a vue-components
attribute:

```html
<div
  vue-entry="MyPlugin.MyComponent"
  vue-components="CoreHome.ProgressBar MyOtherPlugin.MyOtherComponent"
>
  <template v-slot:content>
    <div id="my-content">
      <my-other-component>
        ...
      </my-other-component>

      <progress-bar
        ...
      />
    </div>
  </template>
</div>
```
