docs/5.x/piwiks-reporting-api.md, before:

---
category: DevelopInDepth
---
# Reporting HTTP API

## About this guide

**Read this guide if**

* you'd like to know **how Piwik's Reporting API works and how your plugin can extend it**
* you'd like to know **what Piwik's Reporting API does to data before it is served**
* you'd like to know **what output formats can be used to view data that is returned from the Reporting API**
* you'd like to know **about query parameters that are used by the Reporting API to transform analytics data**

**Guide assumptions**

This guide assumes that you:

* can code in PHP,
* understand how reports are stored in memory (if not read the [Reports](/guides/reports) guide),
* and have a general understanding of extending Piwik (if not, read our [Getting Started](/guides/getting-started-part-1) guide).

## The Reporting API

Piwik's **Reporting API** allows third party applications to access analytics data and manipulate miscellaneous data (anything other than reports or tracked data) through HTTP requests.

### API Requests

Every HTTP API request to the `API.index` controller method will be handled by the Reporting API. Valid requests **must** have a query parameter named `method` that references the API method to invoke, for example, `UserSettings.getBrowser`.

API requests are processed in the following way:

1. The `API::index()` controller method creates a [`Piwik\API\Request`](/api-reference/Piwik/API/Request) instance and uses it to dispatch the API request.
2. The [`Request`](/api-reference/Piwik/API/Request) instance uses the `method` query parameter to determine which plugin and API method to use.
3. The [`Request`](/api-reference/Piwik/API/Request) instance invokes the plugin's API method using query parameters as arguments. Query parameters with the same name as method parameters will be passed to the method. For example, `idSite` query parameter will be passed as the `$idSite` method parameter.
4. The [`Request`](/api-reference/Piwik/API/Request) instance uses a `ResponseBuilder` instance to process the result of the API method and convert it into the desired output format.
5. The output is returned to the `API::index()` controller method and is sent as the HTTP response.

### API methods

The Reporting API invokes methods that are found in each plugin's **API** class. However, the following methods cannot be called from the HTTP API:

- private and protected methods
- methods whose documentation contain a `@ignore` tag

Query parameters are passed as method parameters. So API methods must assume method parameters will be string or array values. Objects are not allowed as parameters.

Methods are only allowed to return the following values:

- numeric values
- string values
- arrays
- [`DataTable`](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable) or [`DataTable\Map`](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Map) instances

*Note: When returning [DataTable](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable) or [DataTable\Map](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Map) instances, filters will need to applied. Make sure to queue filters that are used for presentation purposes and directly apply other ones.*

If a method throws an exception its message will appear in the output. The stack trace can be displayed during debugging by changing `ResponseBuilder::DISPLAY_BACKTRACE_DEBUG` to `true`.

**You can see the list of all API methods your Piwik install exposes: click the _API_ link in the top menu. See the demo's list [here](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&action=listAllAPI&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday).**

## Extra report processing

Reports returned by API methods (i.e. [`DataTable`](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable) or [`DataTable\Map`](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Map) instances) are **processed** before being outputted.

A set of [`DataTable\BaseFilter`](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/BaseFilter) are executed on the reports based on the values of certain query parameters.

This is the list of filters in the order in which they are applied:

1. **Flattener**: Merges an entire `DataTable` hierarchy into one `DataTable`, adding rows of subtables to their parent rows.
    - `flat`: set to `1` to apply the filter
2. **[Pattern](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/Pattern)**: Removes rows of a `DataTable` that do not match a regex pattern.
    - `filter_pattern`: [regular expression](https://www.phpliveregex.com) (the filter is applied if set)
    - `filter_column`: column to apply the regex pattern to (`label` column by default)
3. **[PatternRecursive](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/PatternRecursive)**: Removes rows of a `DataTable` for which the row and all subtables of the row do not match a regex pattern.
    - `filter_pattern_recursive`: [regular expression](https://www.phpliveregex.com) (the filter is applied if set)
    - `filter_column_recursive`: column to apply the regex pattern to (`label` column by default)
4. **[ExcludeLowPopulation](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/ExcludeLowPopulation)**: Removes all rows that contain a specific column whose value is lower than a minimum threshold value.
    - `filter_excludelowpop`: column to filter (the filter is applied if set)
    - `filter_excludelowpop_value`: minimum threshold value (defaults to `0`)
5. **[AddColumnsProcessedMetrics](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/AddColumnsProcessedMetrics)**: Adds some universal processed metrics to each row of the report.
    - `filter_add_columns_when_show_all_columns`: set to `1` to apply the filter
6. **[AddColumnsProcessedMetricsGoal](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/AddColumnsProcessedMetricsGoal)**: Adds processed metrics to each row for each goal of a site.
    - `filter_update_columns_when_show_all_goals`: set to `1` to apply the filter
    - `idGoal`: ID of a goal or one of these special values:
        - `AddColumnsProcessedMetricsGoal::GOALS_OVERVIEW` (default): adds metrics for the goals overview and not individual goals
        - `AddColumnsProcessedMetricsGoal::GOALS_MINIMAL_REPORT`: add just one metric: `revenue_per_visit` (no per-goal metrics will be added)
        - `AddColumnsProcessedMetricsGoal::GOALS_FULL_TABLE`: displays per-goal metrics for every goal of the site including the ecommerce goal
7. **[Sort](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/Sort)**: Sorts the rows.
    - `filter_sort_column`: column to sort (the filter is applied if set)
    - `filter_sort_order`: `'desc'` or `'asc'`
8. **[Truncate](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/Truncate)**: Removes all rows after a certain row index.
    - `filter_truncate`: row number after which rows should be removed (the filter is applied if set)
9. **[Limit](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/Limit)**: Removes rows not within a certain row index range.
    - `filter_limit`: size of the range (the filter is applied if set)
    - `filter_offset`: starting row index of the range
    - `keep_summary_row`: if set to `1`, the summary row is kept in the report
10. **SafeDecodeLabel**: Urldecodes and then sanitizes `label` column values. This filter is always applied.
11. **Queued Filters**: All of a `DataTable`'s queued filters are applied at this point.
    - `disable_queued_filters`: if set to `1`, queued filters will not be applied
12. **[ColumnDelete](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/ColumnDelete)**: Removes columns based on an exclusion or inclusion list.
    - `hideColumns` or `showColumns`: comma separated list of column names to hide or keep (the filter is applied if one is set)
13. **LabelFilter**: This filter will remove all rows except the one (or ones) specified by the `label` query parameter. Only applied if the `label` query parameter is set.
    - `label`: can be a single value or a path to a row in a subtable. To descend into subtables, the value should contain the `>` character, for example, `urldir>urlsubdir>index`. Can also be an array of values, for example, `label[]=arg1&label[]=arg2`.

### Other special query parameters

There are some other special query parameters that affect the way reports are processed:

- `disable_generic_filters`: If set to `1`, the filters numbered 2 - 9 above will not be applied. Defaults to `0` so if this parameter is absent, the filters will be applied.
- `format`: Determines the [output format](#output-formats) of the return value. This affects all return values regardless of whether it is a report or a scalar value.

## Output formats

The output of a Reporting API request is a serialized string of the API method's return value. The format of this string is determined by the value of the **format** query parameter. Currently Piwik supports the following output formats:

- **[xml](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=UserCountry.getCity&format=xml&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday&expanded=1)**
- **[json](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=UserCountry.getCity&format=json&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday&expanded=1)**
- **[csv](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=UserCountry.getCity&format=csv&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday&expanded=1)**
- **[tsv](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=UserCountry.getCity&format=tsv&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday&expanded=1)** _(Excel)_
- **[html](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=UserCountry.getCity&format=html&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday&expanded=1)** _(simple HTML representation, does not use [report visualizations](/guides/visualizing-report-data))_
- **[php](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=UserCountry.getCity&format=php&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday&expanded=1)** _(serialized PHP array)_

There is a special output format value, **original**, that can be used when requesting data from within Piwik using [`Piwik\API\Request`](/api-reference/Piwik/API/Request). This format will force the result to be returned as unprocessed and unserialized data. It should only be used when calling the API within Piwik in PHP.

_Note: The [`Request::processRequest()`](/api-reference/Piwik/API/Request#processrequest) method automatically uses the **original** format, so in most cases you won't need to specify `format=original`._

## Special API Methods

Some of the API methods in the API plugin have special meaning and uses:

### Report Metadata

The **API.getMetadata**, **API.getReportMetadata** and **API.getProcessedReport** API methods can be used to get information about one or all reports. The information includes the metrics contained in the report, documentation for those metrics and [more](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=API.getMetadata&apiModule=UserCountry&apiAction=getCountry&format=xml&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday&expanded=1).

These methods can be used by third party applications that provide an interface to the analytics stored by Piwik:

- `API.getReportMetadata` returns metadata for every report, it can be used to get a list of all available reports for a website
- `API.getMetadata` can be used to get more information about a single report
- `API.getProcessedReport` can be used to get the metadata of a single report along with the report's data.

Report metadata can also be used within Piwik for features that operate on report(s) specified by the user. For example, the **ImageGraph** plugin, which outputs an image of a graph using report data, uses report metadata values as hints for how to draw the output graph. The **ScheduledReports** plugin also uses report metadata in a similar way.

### Row Evolution

Matomo's [row evolution feature](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=CoreHome&action=index&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday#module=UserSettings&action=index&idSite=7&period=day&date=yesterday&popover=RowAction$3ARowEvolution$3AUserSettings.getConfiguration$3A0$3AWindows$25207$2520$252F$2520Chrome$2520$252F$25201920x1080) that is available through the UI is also available through the Reporting API. Third party applications can use the **API.getRowEvolution** method to get both [single row evolution data](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=API.getRowEvolution&idSite=7&period=day&date=2013-11-01,2013-11-25&apiModule=UserSettings&apiAction=getOS&label=Windows+7) or [multi-row evolution data](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=API.getRowEvolution&idSite=7&period=day&date=2013-11-01,2013-11-25&apiModule=UserSettings&apiAction=getOS).

### Bulk API Requests

[Like the Tracking API](/api-reference/tracking-api), the Reporting API supports bulk requests. A bulk request allows applications to invoke and retrieve the results for multiple API methods with one HTTP request. This can be used to save time in applications that query the Piwik HTTP API.

To send a bulk request, send an HTTP request to the **API.getBulkRequest** API method. The only required query parameter is named `urls`. It should be an array of individual API request URLs. For example:

    https://demo.matomo.org/?module=API&method=API.getBulkRequest&format=xml&urls[]=module%3DAPI%26method%3DVisitorInterest.getNumberOfVisitsPerVisitDuration%26format%3DXML%26idSite%3D62%26period%3Dday%26date%3D2013-11-24%26expanded%3D1&urls[]=module%3DAPI%26method%3DUserSettings.getBrowser%26format%3DXML%26idSite%3D7%26period%3Dday%26date%3D2013-11-24%26expanded%3D1

This example uses the following API requests:

- module=API&method=UserSettings.getBrowser&format=XML&idSite=62&period=day&date=2013-11-24&expanded=1
- module=API&method=VisitorInterest.getNumberOfVisitsPerVisitDuration&format=XML&idSite=62&period=day&date=2013-11-24&expanded=1

**_Note: The separate API methods are executed synchronously, so for long-running API methods, using a bulk request may be a bad idea._**

### Other Methods

- **API.get**: Calls the `get` API method of all loaded plugins that support it and merges the result. The `get` methods all output the metrics that the plugin archives, so the result of **API.get** is the set of values for every metric your Piwik install supports (for the specified website & period).
- **API.getSegmentDimensionMetadata**: Returns metadata for every supported [segment dimension](/api-reference/segmentation). The following information is returned for each segment dimension:
  - `type`: The type of segment dimension.
  - `category`: A translated string that describes the segment dimension's category.
  - `name`: A translated string or a translation token that describes the segment dimension itself.
  - `segment`: The segment dimension's ID. This is what gets used in segment expressions.
  - `acceptedValues`: A string that describes what values should be used with the segment dimension.
  - `sqlSegment`: The table column the segment dimension operates on, for example, `log_visit.idvisitor`.
  - `sqlFilterValue`: An optional PHP callback that transforms the value supplied in a segment expression before it is used in an SQL expression.
  - `permission`: Whether the current user can use this segment dimension.
- **API.getSuggestedValuesForSegment**: Returns a list of values that can be used with a specified segment dimension.
- **API.getLogoUrl**: Returns a URL to the Piwik logo.
- **API.getHeaderLogoUrl**: Returns a URL to a smaller version of the Piwik logo.

## Learn more

- To learn **how API classes are used internally** read our [Piwik APIs](/guides/apis) guide.
- To learn **about how to calculate a report** read our [Reports](/guides/reports) guide.

Commit message:

Add goal parameter description to piwiks-reporting-api.md
add missing goal parameter:
`filter_show_goal_columns_process_goals`: Includes process goals using goal identifiers. Metrics are exported to additional columns for the specified goals and in the respective order listed.

docs/5.x/piwiks-reporting-api.md, after:

---
category: DevelopInDepth
---
# Reporting HTTP API

## About this guide

**Read this guide if**

* you'd like to know **how Piwik's Reporting API works and how your plugin can extend it**
* you'd like to know **what Piwik's Reporting API does to data before it is served**
* you'd like to know **what output formats can be used to view data that is returned from the Reporting API**
* you'd like to know **about query parameters that are used by the Reporting API to transform analytics data**

**Guide assumptions**

This guide assumes that you:

* can code in PHP,
* understand how reports are stored in memory (if not read the [Reports](/guides/reports) guide),
* and have a general understanding of extending Piwik (if not, read our [Getting Started](/guides/getting-started-part-1) guide).

## The Reporting API

Piwik's **Reporting API** allows third party applications to access analytics data and manipulate miscellaneous data (anything other than reports or tracked data) through HTTP requests.

### API Requests

Every HTTP API request to the `API.index` controller method will be handled by the Reporting API. Valid requests **must** have a query parameter named `method` that references the API method to invoke, for example, `UserSettings.getBrowser`.

API requests are processed in the following way:

1. The `API::index()` controller method creates a [`Piwik\API\Request`](/api-reference/Piwik/API/Request) instance and uses it to dispatch the API request.
2. The [`Request`](/api-reference/Piwik/API/Request) instance uses the `method` query parameter to determine which plugin and API method to use.
3. The [`Request`](/api-reference/Piwik/API/Request) instance invokes the plugin's API method using query parameters as arguments. Query parameters with the same name as method parameters will be passed to the method. For example, `idSite` query parameter will be passed as the `$idSite` method parameter.
4. The [`Request`](/api-reference/Piwik/API/Request) instance uses a `ResponseBuilder` instance to process the result of the API method and convert it into the desired output format.
5. The output is returned to the `API::index()` controller method and is sent as the HTTP response.

### API methods

The Reporting API invokes methods that are found in each plugin's **API** class. However, the following methods cannot be called from the HTTP API:

- private and protected methods
- methods whose documentation contain a `@ignore` tag

Query parameters are passed as method parameters. So API methods must assume method parameters will be string or array values. Objects are not allowed as parameters.

Methods are only allowed to return the following values:

- numeric values
- string values
- arrays
- [`DataTable`](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable) or [`DataTable\Map`](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Map) instances

*Note: When returning [DataTable](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable) or [DataTable\Map](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Map) instances, filters will need to applied. Make sure to queue filters that are used for presentation purposes and directly apply other ones.*

If a method throws an exception its message will appear in the output. The stack trace can be displayed during debugging by changing `ResponseBuilder::DISPLAY_BACKTRACE_DEBUG` to `true`.

**You can see the list of all API methods your Piwik install exposes: click the _API_ link in the top menu. See the demo's list [here](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&action=listAllAPI&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday).**

## Extra report processing

Reports returned by API methods (i.e. [`DataTable`](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable) or [`DataTable\Map`](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Map) instances) are **processed** before being outputted.

A set of [`DataTable\BaseFilter`](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/BaseFilter) are executed on the reports based on the values of certain query parameters.

This is the list of filters in the order in which they are applied:

1. **Flattener**: Merges an entire `DataTable` hierarchy into one `DataTable`, adding rows of subtables to their parent rows.
    - `flat`: set to `1` to apply the filter
2. **[Pattern](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/Pattern)**: Removes rows of a `DataTable` that do not match a regex pattern.
    - `filter_pattern`: [regular expression](https://www.phpliveregex.com) (the filter is applied if set)
    - `filter_column`: column to apply the regex pattern to (`label` column by default)
3. **[PatternRecursive](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/PatternRecursive)**: Removes rows of a `DataTable` for which the row and all subtables of the row do not match a regex pattern.
    - `filter_pattern_recursive`: [regular expression](https://www.phpliveregex.com) (the filter is applied if set)
    - `filter_column_recursive`: column to apply the regex pattern to (`label` column by default)
4. **[ExcludeLowPopulation](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/ExcludeLowPopulation)**: Removes all rows that contain a specific column whose value is lower than a minimum threshold value.
    - `filter_excludelowpop`: column to filter (the filter is applied if set)
    - `filter_excludelowpop_value`: minimum threshold value (defaults to `0`)
5. **[AddColumnsProcessedMetrics](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/AddColumnsProcessedMetrics)**: Adds some universal processed metrics to each row of the report.
    - `filter_add_columns_when_show_all_columns`: set to `1` to apply the filter
6. **[AddColumnsProcessedMetricsGoal](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/AddColumnsProcessedMetricsGoal)**: Adds processed metrics to each row for each goal of a site.
    - `filter_update_columns_when_show_all_goals`: set to `1` to apply the filter
    - `idGoal`: ID of a goal or one of these special values:
        - `AddColumnsProcessedMetricsGoal::GOALS_OVERVIEW` (default): adds metrics for the goals overview and not individual goals
        - `AddColumnsProcessedMetricsGoal::GOALS_MINIMAL_REPORT`: add just one metric: `revenue_per_visit` (no per-goal metrics will be added)
        - `AddColumnsProcessedMetricsGoal::GOALS_FULL_TABLE`: displays per-goal metrics for every goal of the site including the ecommerce goal
    - `filter_show_goal_columns_process_goals`: Includes process goals using goal identifiers. Metrics are exported to additional columns for the specified goals and in the respective order listed.
7. **[Sort](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/Sort)**: Sorts the rows.
    - `filter_sort_column`: column to sort (the filter is applied if set)
    - `filter_sort_order`: `'desc'` or `'asc'`
8. **[Truncate](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/Truncate)**: Removes all rows after a certain row index.
    - `filter_truncate`: row number after which rows should be removed (the filter is applied if set)
9. **[Limit](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/Limit)**: Removes rows not within a certain row index range.
    - `filter_limit`: size of the range (the filter is applied if set)
    - `filter_offset`: starting row index of the range
    - `keep_summary_row`: if set to `1`, the summary row is kept in the report
10. **SafeDecodeLabel**: Urldecodes and then sanitizes `label` column values. This filter is always applied.
11. **Queued Filters**: All of a `DataTable`'s queued filters are applied at this point.
    - `disable_queued_filters`: if set to `1`, queued filters will not be applied
12. **[ColumnDelete](/api-reference/Piwik/DataTable/Filter/ColumnDelete)**: Removes columns based on an exclusion or inclusion list.
    - `hideColumns` or `showColumns`: comma separated list of column names to hide or keep (the filter is applied if one is set)
13. **LabelFilter**: This filter will remove all rows except the one (or ones) specified by the `label` query parameter. Only applied if the `label` query parameter is set.
    - `label`: can be a single value or a path to a row in a subtable. To descend into subtables, the value should contain the `>` character, for example, `urldir>urlsubdir>index`. Can also be an array of values, for example, `label[]=arg1&label[]=arg2`.

### Other special query parameters

There are some other special query parameters that affect the way reports are processed:

- `disable_generic_filters`: If set to `1`, the filters numbered 2 - 9 above will not be applied. Defaults to `0` so if this parameter is absent, the filters will be applied.
- `format`: Determines the [output format](#output-formats) of the return value. This affects all return values regardless of whether it is a report or a scalar value.

## Output formats

The output of a Reporting API request is a serialized string of the API method's return value. The format of this string is determined by the value of the **format** query parameter. Currently Piwik supports the following output formats:

- **[xml](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=UserCountry.getCity&format=xml&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday&expanded=1)**
- **[json](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=UserCountry.getCity&format=json&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday&expanded=1)**
- **[csv](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=UserCountry.getCity&format=csv&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday&expanded=1)**
- **[tsv](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=UserCountry.getCity&format=tsv&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday&expanded=1)** _(Excel)_
- **[html](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=UserCountry.getCity&format=html&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday&expanded=1)** _(simple HTML representation, does not use [report visualizations](/guides/visualizing-report-data))_
- **[php](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=UserCountry.getCity&format=php&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday&expanded=1)** _(serialized PHP array)_

There is a special output format value, **original**, that can be used when requesting data from within Piwik using [`Piwik\API\Request`](/api-reference/Piwik/API/Request). This format will force the result to be returned as unprocessed and unserialized data. It should only be used when calling the API within Piwik in PHP.

_Note: The [`Request::processRequest()`](/api-reference/Piwik/API/Request#processrequest) method automatically uses the **original** format, so in most cases you won't need to specify `format=original`._

## Special API Methods

Some of the API methods in the API plugin have special meaning and uses:

### Report Metadata

The **API.getMetadata**, **API.getReportMetadata** and **API.getProcessedReport** API methods can be used to get information about one or all reports. The information includes the metrics contained in the report, documentation for those metrics and [more](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=API.getMetadata&apiModule=UserCountry&apiAction=getCountry&format=xml&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday&expanded=1).

These methods can be used by third party applications that provide an interface to the analytics stored by Piwik:

- `API.getReportMetadata` returns metadata for every report, it can be used to get a list of all available reports for a website
- `API.getMetadata` can be used to get more information about a single report
- `API.getProcessedReport` can be used to get the metadata of a single report along with the report's data.

Report metadata can also be used within Piwik for features that operate on report(s) specified by the user. For example, the **ImageGraph** plugin, which outputs an image of a graph using report data, uses report metadata values as hints for how to draw the output graph. The **ScheduledReports** plugin also uses report metadata in a similar way.

### Row Evolution

Matomo's [row evolution feature](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=CoreHome&action=index&idSite=62&period=day&date=yesterday#module=UserSettings&action=index&idSite=7&period=day&date=yesterday&popover=RowAction$3ARowEvolution$3AUserSettings.getConfiguration$3A0$3AWindows$25207$2520$252F$2520Chrome$2520$252F$25201920x1080) that is available through the UI is also available through the Reporting API. Third party applications can use the **API.getRowEvolution** method to get both [single row evolution data](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=API.getRowEvolution&idSite=7&period=day&date=2013-11-01,2013-11-25&apiModule=UserSettings&apiAction=getOS&label=Windows+7) or [multi-row evolution data](https://demo.matomo.org/index.php?module=API&method=API.getRowEvolution&idSite=7&period=day&date=2013-11-01,2013-11-25&apiModule=UserSettings&apiAction=getOS).

### Bulk API Requests

[Like the Tracking API](/api-reference/tracking-api), the Reporting API supports bulk requests. A bulk request allows applications to invoke and retrieve the results for multiple API methods with one HTTP request. This can be used to save time in applications that query the Piwik HTTP API.

To send a bulk request, send an HTTP request to the **API.getBulkRequest** API method. The only required query parameter is named `urls`. It should be an array of individual API request URLs. For example:

    https://demo.matomo.org/?module=API&method=API.getBulkRequest&format=xml&urls[]=module%3DAPI%26method%3DVisitorInterest.getNumberOfVisitsPerVisitDuration%26format%3DXML%26idSite%3D62%26period%3Dday%26date%3D2013-11-24%26expanded%3D1&urls[]=module%3DAPI%26method%3DUserSettings.getBrowser%26format%3DXML%26idSite%3D7%26period%3Dday%26date%3D2013-11-24%26expanded%3D1

This example uses the following API requests:

- module=API&method=UserSettings.getBrowser&format=XML&idSite=62&period=day&date=2013-11-24&expanded=1
- module=API&method=VisitorInterest.getNumberOfVisitsPerVisitDuration&format=XML&idSite=62&period=day&date=2013-11-24&expanded=1

**_Note: The separate API methods are executed synchronously, so for long-running API methods, using a bulk request may be a bad idea._**

### Other Methods

- **API.get**: Calls the `get` API method of all loaded plugins that support it and merges the result. The `get` methods all output the metrics that the plugin archives, so the result of **API.get** is the set of values for every metric your Piwik install supports (for the specified website & period).
- **API.getSegmentDimensionMetadata**: Returns metadata for every supported [segment dimension](/api-reference/segmentation). The following information is returned for each segment dimension:
  - `type`: The type of segment dimension.
  - `category`: A translated string that describes the segment dimension's category.
  - `name`: A translated string or a translation token that describes the segment dimension itself.
  - `segment`: The segment dimension's ID. This is what gets used in segment expressions.
  - `acceptedValues`: A string that describes what values should be used with the segment dimension.
  - `sqlSegment`: The table column the segment dimension operates on, for example, `log_visit.idvisitor`.
  - `sqlFilterValue`: An optional PHP callback that transforms the value supplied in a segment expression before it is used in an SQL expression.
  - `permission`: Whether the current user can use this segment dimension.
- **API.getSuggestedValuesForSegment**: Returns a list of values that can be used with a specified segment dimension.
- **API.getLogoUrl**: Returns a URL to the Piwik logo.
- **API.getHeaderLogoUrl**: Returns a URL to a smaller version of the Piwik logo.

## Learn more

- To learn **how API classes are used internally** read our [Piwik APIs](/guides/apis) guide.
- To learn **about how to calculate a report** read our [Reports](/guides/reports) guide.
