docs/migrate-matomo-3-to-4.md, before:

---
category: Develop
---
# Migrate Plugin from Matomo 3.X to Matomo 4

This migration guide covers explains how to do some migrations to make a plugin compatible with Matomo 4. A list of
all changes in Matomo 4 can be found in the [Changelog](/changelog).

## Create a new branch

We recommend you create a new branch for your plugin that supports Matomo 4. For example `4.x-dev`. This way you will be able to make changes to your plugin for Matomo 3 and Matomo 4 and release independent versions for each of them. You can still publish updates to your plugin that supports Matomo 3 once you have published an update for a version that supports Matomo 4.

## Adjust the required Matomo version

For your plugin to be executed in Matomo 4 you first need to show it is compatible with Matomo 4 in your `plugin.json` file:

* specify that your plugin requires Matomo 4 (the require for Piwik 3 used to be eg `"piwik": ">=3.0.0-b1,<4.0.0-b1"`). 
* we recommend to also increase your plugin's major version number eg from `3.2.3` to `4.0.0`.

The `plugin.json` would look like this:

```json
   "version": "4.0.0",
   "require": {
        "matomo": ">=4.0.0-b1,<5.0.0-b1"
    },
```

We no longer support plugins that support multiple major Matomo versions such as Matomo 3 and Matomo 4: `"matomo": ">=3.0.0-b1,<5.0.0-b1"`. You would in this case receive an error email and the release would not be published.

## Required PHP version

We now require PHP 7.2.5 instead of PHP 5.5. This means you can use more PHP language features:

* [New features in PHP 5.6](https://www.php.net/manual/en/migration56.new-features.php)
* [New features in PHP 7.0](https://www.php.net/manual/en/migration70.new-features.php)
* [New features in PHP 7.1](https://www.php.net/manual/en/migration71.new-features.php)
* [New features in PHP 7.2](https://www.php.net/manual/en/migration72.new-features.php)

## Browser support

We no longer support IE 10 in the Matomo user interface.

## Events

If your plugin is listening to events you have to rename the method `getListHooksRegistered` to `registerEvents`.

There are also various other event changes see the [changelog](/changelog).

## Twig templates

We updated from Twig 1 to Twig 3 which requires a few changes should you be using twig templates.

You can find details on that on this deprecation lists.

[Twig 2 changes](https://twig.symfony.com/doc/1.x/deprecated.html) | 
[Twig 3 changes](https://twig.symfony.com/doc/2.x/deprecated.html)

Changes from those lists we had to apply in core:

* Adding an if condition on a for tag is deprecated in Twig 2.10. Use a filter filter or an “if” condition inside the “for” body instead (if your condition depends on a variable updated inside the loop).

eg. 
```
{% for id,name in list if id > 17 %}
```
becomes
```
{% for id,name in list|filter(id=> id > 17) %}
```

* The spaceless tag is deprecated in Twig 2.7. Use the spaceless filter instead or {% apply spaceless %} (the Twig\Node\SpacelessNode and Twig\TokenParser\SpacelessTokenParser classes are also deprecated).

e.g. `{% spaceless %}` becomes `{% apply spaceless %}`

* The sameas and divisibleby tests are deprecated in favor of same as and divisible by respectively.

e.g. `divisibleby(2)` becomes `divisible by(2)`

## Running tests on Travis

If you are [running tests for your plugin on Travis](https://developer.matomo.org/guides/tests-travis) you should regenerate the `.travis.yml` file by executing the following command within your Matomo directory:

```
$ ./console generate:travis-yml --plugin=MyPlugin --php-versions="7.2,7.4" --distribution="bionic" --sudo-false --verbose
```

You may need to update the "exclude" matrix as this isn't done automatically should you not want certain jobs to run. It would otherwise only exclude runs for PHP versions that don't run anymore anyway.

## Summary

In this guide we have seen which steps to take to migrate your Matomo plugin to be compatible with our latest Matomo 4.
If you need further help for converting your plugin to Matomo 3, head over to the [Piwik developers community forums](https://forum.matomo.org/c/plugins-platform).

Once you've adjusted your plugin, don't forget to release a new version.

Commit message:

Mention developers should double check the webhook exists for the marketplace

docs/migrate-matomo-3-to-4.md, after:

---
category: Develop
---
# Migrate Plugin from Matomo 3.X to Matomo 4

This migration guide covers explains how to do some migrations to make a plugin compatible with Matomo 4. A list of
all changes in Matomo 4 can be found in the [Changelog](/changelog).

## Create a new branch

We recommend you create a new branch for your plugin that supports Matomo 4. For example `4.x-dev`. This way you will be able to make changes to your plugin for Matomo 3 and Matomo 4 and release independent versions for each of them. You can still publish updates to your plugin that supports Matomo 3 once you have published an update for a version that supports Matomo 4.

## Adjust the required Matomo version

For your plugin to be executed in Matomo 4 you first need to show it is compatible with Matomo 4 in your `plugin.json` file:

* specify that your plugin requires Matomo 4 (the require for Piwik 3 used to be eg `"piwik": ">=3.0.0-b1,<4.0.0-b1"`). 
* we recommend to also increase your plugin's major version number eg from `3.2.3` to `4.0.0`.

The `plugin.json` would look like this:

```json
   "version": "4.0.0",
   "require": {
        "matomo": ">=4.0.0-b1,<5.0.0-b1"
    },
```

We no longer support plugins that support multiple major Matomo versions such as Matomo 3 and Matomo 4: `"matomo": ">=3.0.0-b1,<5.0.0-b1"`. You would in this case receive an error email and the release would not be published.

## Required PHP version

We now require PHP 7.2.5 instead of PHP 5.5. This means you can use more PHP language features:

* [New features in PHP 5.6](https://www.php.net/manual/en/migration56.new-features.php)
* [New features in PHP 7.0](https://www.php.net/manual/en/migration70.new-features.php)
* [New features in PHP 7.1](https://www.php.net/manual/en/migration71.new-features.php)
* [New features in PHP 7.2](https://www.php.net/manual/en/migration72.new-features.php)

## Browser support

We no longer support IE 10 in the Matomo user interface.

## Events

If your plugin is listening to events you have to rename the method `getListHooksRegistered` to `registerEvents`.

There are also various other event changes see the [changelog](/changelog).

## Twig templates

We updated from Twig 1 to Twig 3 which requires a few changes should you be using twig templates.

You can find details on that on this deprecation lists.

[Twig 2 changes](https://twig.symfony.com/doc/1.x/deprecated.html) | 
[Twig 3 changes](https://twig.symfony.com/doc/2.x/deprecated.html)

Changes from those lists we had to apply in core:

* Adding an if condition on a for tag is deprecated in Twig 2.10. Use a filter filter or an “if” condition inside the “for” body instead (if your condition depends on a variable updated inside the loop).

eg. 
```
{% for id,name in list if id > 17 %}
```
becomes
```
{% for id,name in list|filter(id=> id > 17) %}
```

* The spaceless tag is deprecated in Twig 2.7. Use the spaceless filter instead or {% apply spaceless %} (the Twig\Node\SpacelessNode and Twig\TokenParser\SpacelessTokenParser classes are also deprecated).

e.g. `{% spaceless %}` becomes `{% apply spaceless %}`

* The sameas and divisibleby tests are deprecated in favor of same as and divisible by respectively.

e.g. `divisibleby(2)` becomes `divisible by(2)`

## Running tests on Travis

If you are [running tests for your plugin on Travis](https://developer.matomo.org/guides/tests-travis) you should regenerate the `.travis.yml` file by executing the following command within your Matomo directory:

```
$ ./console generate:travis-yml --plugin=MyPlugin --php-versions="7.2,7.4" --distribution="bionic" --sudo-false --verbose
```

You may need to update the "exclude" matrix as this isn't done automatically should you not want certain jobs to run. It would otherwise only exclude runs for PHP versions that don't run anymore anyway.

## Marketplace distribution

Updates used to be published from the GitHub repository to the Matomo Marketplace using a GitHub service. GitHub deprecated this feature a while ago. To send updates to the marketplace you need to make sure you have a [Matomo Webhook](https://developer.matomo.org/guides/distributing-your-plugin#activate-the-piwik-plugins-webhook) configured in your repository. Otherwise the Marketplace won't notice there has been an update for your plugin.

## Summary

In this guide we have seen which steps to take to migrate your Matomo plugin to be compatible with our latest Matomo 4.
If you need further help for converting your plugin to Matomo 3, head over to the [Piwik developers community forums](https://forum.matomo.org/c/plugins-platform).

Once you've adjusted your plugin, don't forget to release a new version.
